 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 1  
 
 
Office of the Governor  
Texas Economic Development & Tourism Office 
P.O. Box 12428 
Austin, Texas 78711-2428 
Telephone: (512) 936-0100 
gov.texas.gov/business 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This handbook contains hyperlinked text. To access the online version of this handbook with functioning hyperlinks, visit:  
 
https://gov.texas.gov/uploads/files/business/Governors_Small_Business_Handbook.pdf  
Contact Us 
2  |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
3 7- Step Guide on Starting a Business in Texas 
4 Small Business Resources 
5 Guide to Writing a Business Plan 
6 Access to Finance: Overview & Lenders 
7 Financing: State Programs 
9 Financing: Federal Programs - Small Business Administration 
10 Financing: Federal Programs 
11 Business Entity Formation & Registration 
16 Guide to Status Terminology Used by the Secretary of State 
17 Business Filings & Trademarks Fee Schedule 
18 Tax Responsibilities 
19 Additional Resources: Unemployment Tax 
21 Business Licenses and Permits 
22 Business Employer Requirements 
23 Additional Resources: Texas Workforce Commission 
25 Additional Information: TWC Vocational Rehabilitation Services 
26 Additional Information: Insurance 
30 Texas Procurement and Support Services 
31 State of Texas HUB Certification 
33 Federal and National Small Business Certifications 
37 Additional Resources: Small Business Administration 
39 Additional Resources: Small Business Development Centers 
40 Additional Resources: Women's Business Centers 
41 Additional Resources: SCORE Association 
42 Additional Resources: Federal Contracting Assistance 
43 Additional Resources: Legal Services 
44 Additional Resources: Exporting 
46 Additional Resources: TEEX Extension Service 
47 Additional Resources: Public Libraries 
49 Additional Resources: Veteran Resources 
53 Additional Resources: Persons with Disabilities 
54 Small Business Touts 
55 Index A: E ntity Contact Information as provided by Texas.gov 
Table of Contents 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 3  
There are several important steps to consider when starting a business in Texas. The Small Business Handbook 
provides a comprehensive overview of business planning, registration, requirements, and financing.  The Handbook 
also identifies programs and organizations supporting entrepreneurs and small business owners throughout the state. 
Below, we have highlighted seven important steps and provided a consolidated list of organizations dedicated to 
supporting small business owners at all stages. 
Step 1: Write Your Business Plan 
A business plan is a dynamic road map for your business. It should outline the main purpose and value proposition 
of your business, its structure, financing, and competitive advantages. The U.S. Small Business Administration 
(SBA) has some great templates f
or crafting a business plan.  For more information, see page 6. 
Step 2: Choose Your Business Location 
Choosing a business location will depend on the type of business you operate. Consider looking at area zoning 
ordinances. Assess how feasible it is to access your supply chain and customers, and if there is an available workforce.  
Step 3: Finance Your Business 
There are several ways to fund your new enterprise, including using your own savings and raising money from 
friends and family. You can also apply for a bank or micro loan, secure a federal loan (via the  SBA), or
 seek credit 
through personal financing. Other alternatives include crowd funding, angel, or venture capital investors.  The SBA 
offers a useful guide t o funding your business. Micro loans are available from Community Development Financial 
Institutions (CDFIs).  Find your nearest CDFI using the onlin e CDFI l ocator. Also, visit our Financing and Capital 
webpage for more information. F or additional information, see page 8. 
Step 4: Business Structure and Registration 
Determine the appropriate structure for your business. In general, sole proprietorships and partnerships need to 
register and file the business name (DBA or assumed name) with their local county clerk’s office. If you decide to 
incorporate, the Secretary of State’s Office (
SOS) website has information on choosing the right legal structure for 
you. You can also register the new legal entity on the SOS site. For more information, see page 15. 
Step 5: Business Tax Responsibilities 
Determine the potential tax responsibilities of the new business with federal, state, and local tax authorities. Federal 
tax obligations are filed through the Internal Revenue Service (
IRS). State tax filings are done through 
the Texas C omptroller of Public Accounts  (CPA). If starting an online business, this online Marketplace Seller  tax 
information may be useful. For questions about local business and property taxes, consult your county’s appraisal 
district or tax assessor-collector. Find your local appraisal district and tax office on the CPA’s website. 
Step 6: Business Licenses and Permits by Business Type 
A general business license is not required in Texas. However, it is important to determine necessary licenses, 
permits, certifications, registrations, or authorizations for a specific business activity, at the federal, state, and local 
level. Our Texas Business Licenses & Permits Guide o ffers a comprehensive a listing of state permits and licenses 
required for persons wanting to operate a business enterprise in Texas. For more information or assistance, please 
contact the Business Permit Office (
BPO)  in the Texas Economic Development & Tourism Office (EDT) . Click here 
to co ntact  BPO. F or  more information, see page 28. 
Step 7: Business Employer Requirements 
If planning to employ staff, determine federal and state employer requirements. To learn more about Texas 
employer resources, visit the Texas Workforce Commission’s businesses and employers webpage. 
 
7-Step Guide on Starting a Business in Texas 
4  |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
Counseling, Workshops, Mentorship: 
• Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs) ar e a partnership between the SBA and universities. They 
provide free advice on marketing, financing, and business growth to local businesses, start-ups, and 
entrepreneurs. Find your nearest SBDC in Texas using the online directory. 
• SCORE i s a national network of experienced executives who volunteer as mentors. They help start -ups 
and established entrepreneurs to grow their businesses. SCORE also provides workshops and courses in 
business education. Find your nearest SCORE chapter using the online SCORE locator. 
• Women’s Business Centers (WBC) pr ovide free to low -cost counseling and training and focus on women 
who want to start, grow, and expand their small business. 
• U .S. Small Business Administration (SBA) of fers free business counseling from their partnering 
organizations and experts, has SBA-guaranteed business loans programs, offers low-interest disaster 
loans, and helps small businesses with federal government contracting.  
• T exas Workforce Commission  as sists Texans to find information and assistance to start or expand your 
business in Texas. 
• T he Governor’s Office of Small Business Assistance  h osts a number of  informative webinars and in-person 
events throughout the year to share information about resources for small businesses and entrepreneurs in 
Texas. We work closely with local, state and federal partners, including the Texas Workforce Commission, 
U.S. Small Business Administration, Small Business Development Centers and local economic development 
organizations, to offer these consistently popular webinars and events. 
Other Start-Up Resources: 
• Local resources, including non-governmental organizations, cities’ small business departments, chambers, 
economic development corporations, incubators, coworking spaces, and local libraries, provide a wealth of 
opportunities for individual counseling, workshops, trainings, and access to resources. 
• The Governor’s Small Business Resource Portal of fers a customized list of useful business resources to 
assist you in starting or growing your business in Texas. 
• Law yer Referral & Information Service (LRIS)  wi ll help find a lawyer or other resource depending on your 
legal needs and financial means. 
• Lega l Aid: Lone Star Legal Aid and Texas RioGrande Legal Aid pr ovide free legal services for low -income 
residents to start or maintain their small business. 
• N ational Apex Accelerator Alliance ( NAPEX) pr ovides individual counseling and support to help 
understand if you are ready for government contracting, determine eligibility for certifications , and help you 
register. 
• T exas Historical Commission  has  an online building inventory for Texas downtowns featuring historic 
property listings. 
• T he Office of the Governor has a comprehensive directory of resources for start -ups. The directory 
includes coworking spaces, incubator and accelerator programs, financial institutions, and venture capital 
funds. To read the directory, please click here. 
Small Business Resources 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 5  
Creating a business plan is an important process. It will serve to outline the main purpose of your business, structure, 
financing, and advantages over other market competitors. A solid business plan can be used as a framework for your 
company’s mission and serves as support when it comes time to apply for financing. The following are some 
important topics to consider including in a business plan: 
 
Cover Page: Business Name, Date, and Contact Information 
 
Executive Summary: Description of the product or service that your company will sell; to whom the product or 
service will be sold to; what market need your company solves; your company’s competitive advantage; and finally, if 
seeking capital, identify how much capital you are seeking and for what purpose(s). 
 
Business Overview: Description of the company’s business, legal, and leadership structure. State your company’s 
mission and vision. Detail your company’s timeline/history or start-up plan. 
 
Management and Operations Plan: Name the company’s owners and management team (include their resumes). 
Discuss the hiring needs, hiring process, and the company’s management approach. Follow the management plan 
with details on the company’s operations. Include information on the day/time you are open and if you have an 
e-commerce presence. Include a list of the licenses and permits that will be obtained. 
 
If you have a start-up, provide a time frame for building, producing, and generating the business. Include the 
breakdown of any risk and explain why and how that will be overcome. 
 
Products & Services: In this section, go into more detail on the products and services you will be offering. Include 
information on the prices and costs of goods sold. 
 
Comp
etition and Marketing: In this section, expand on the market need you are fulfilling, your company’s competition, 
and your company’s competitive advantage. Also elaborate on market trends that impact your company and its 
operations. Define your target customer (e.g. consumers, businesses, government) and any related certifications 
that might be useful and relevant (e.g. HUB, WBE etc.). 
 
Once you have defined your company’s target customer, elaborate on your marketing plan. Explain how the 
product will be marketed so to demonstrate a competitive edge over the other similar product or service providers in 
the industry. Explain the expenses involved in marketing the product and services. Detail the market in which you 
will be working/servicing. 
 
Strategic Financial Plan: Outline how much money the business will need and where the support will come from. 
Include a breakdown of the monthly budget and cash flow for the first year. Include detailed information on the 
current market, projected customer demands, pricing strategy, available financial support, and anticipated financial 
support. Include costs associated with development, production, office space, employee salaries, equipment purchase, 
etc. Finally, include anticipated timeline for marketing and goals for profitability. 
 
Note: If your business is seeking financing, then you will probably be asked to provide income statements 
demonstrating sound financial accountability. Provide a stated goal for profitability and what the return on investment 
will be. If your company is a start-up and applying for funding, most institutions will want to see personal financial 
statements. 
 
No
te: Just like a business plan, it is important to have an “elevator pitch.” Whether pitching to potential investors or to a 
potential client, a strong and concise pitch is a good tool to have. Important aspects to consider addressing include 
the problem/gap you are addressing, target market, competitive advantage, and the stage of your business. There are 
many programs throughout the state that can help business owners craft, refine, and practice their pitch. 
Guide to Writing a Business Plan 
6  |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
Small businesses make up more than 99% of the businesses in Texas. Many rely upon funding and financing to get 
their new and current businesses off the ground. 
 
The Governor’s Office of Small Business Assistance works closely with a variety of partners to highlight the various 
avenues for accessing capital. 
 
The Governor’s Office cannot recommend or suggest specific lenders, but we invite you to visit the following nonprofit 
lenders and chartered banks. The institutions listed below have a state-wide presence, but there are many local 
options available depending on where you are located. 
FINANCING RESOURCES 
To find a Texas financial institution, visit the National Information Center’s website. 
 
For international financial institutions in the state that enable international trade by issuing letters of credit, providing 
currency exchange, and making trade related loans, as well as financing projects in various countries, please visit 
Texas Bankers Association and the Independent Bankers Association of Texas. 
 
Credit Unions: To find your nearest credit union, please visit the Credit Union Locator f
rom the National Credit Union 
Administration. 
 
B
anks: The Texas Department of Banking pr ovides  a list of Texas state-chartered banks and holding companies. 
 
CROWDFUNDING AND EQUITY CROWDFUNDING 
Crowdfunding and equity crowdfunding are popular methods of raising capital. Traditional crowdfunding consists of 
individuals who give small donations with the goal to partially fund a project. In exchange, the crowd receives 
different items depending on the size of their donation. Equity crowdfunding is when individuals invest in an early -
stage company in exchange for shares in that company. Some examples of crowdfunding platforms can be found 
here.
Access to Finance: Overview & Lenders 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 7  
 
Texas Micro-Business Disaster Recovery (MBDR) Loan Program 
The Texas MBDR Loan Program pr ovides zero- interest loans to eligible CDFIs for purpose of making interest-
bearing loans to qualifying micro-businesses that have difficulty in accessing capital following a declared disaster. 
All income received on a loan made by a CDFI participating in the program is the property of the financial institution. 
Income received on a loan includes the payment of interest by a borrower micro- business and the administrative 
fees assessed by the CDFI.  
Texas Workforce Training Grants 
The Texas Workforce Commission (TWC) offers the Skills for Small Business gr ant. This supports businesses with 
fewer than 100 employees and incentivizes training for new, full-time workers. Support is also available to upgrade 
the skills of existing full-time workers. Training is provided through community or technical colleges or the Texas 
Engineering Extension Service (TEEX). 
Texas Small Business Credit Initiative (TSBCI) 
The TSBCI Program supports small business growth and helps create new jobs through increased access to small 
business funding. The program assists all small businesses but focuses on traditionally marginalized and those that 
have been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. TSBCI is administered by EDT’s Economic Development Finance 
Division, within the Office of the Governor, on behalf of the U.S. Department of the Treasury. For more information, 
visit the Texas Small Business Credit Initiative website. 
 
Socially and Economically Disadvantaged Individuals (SEDI), Very Small Businesses (VSB) , and other business 
owners should contact their preferred lender to encourage enrollment in TSBCI as a participating financial 
institution. Through participating financial institutions, Texas administers two TSBCI programs : the Capital Access 
Program (CAP) and the Loan Guarantee Program (LGP), which are open to eligible Texas businesses with 499 or 
fewer employees. 
 
For more information about the federal State Small Business Credit Initiative (SSBCI) program, please visit the U.S. 
Department of the Treasury’s website. Additional guidance, forms and other resources related to Texas' TSBCI 
program will be posted to the TSBCI webpage as details become available. 
 
In addition to its administered programs, TSBCI is working with the following banks and CDFIs to administer the 
funds. This list is subject to change. Lenders' participation status is updated as information changes. The TSBCI 
program does not endorse or recommend any specific lender. The TSBCI team is available to answer any 
questions you may have at tsbci@gov.texas.gov. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Financing: State Programs 
8  |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
Banks 
 
Lone Star National Bank 
Phone: (956) 984-2440, (800) 580-0322 
https://www.lonestarnationalbank.com/ 
 
Southwestern National Bank 
Phone: (713) 995-3234, (713) 272-5049, (713) 771-9700 
 https://www.swnbk.com/ 
 
Wallis Bank 
Phone: (713) 580-9990, (713) 935-3700, (713) 580-9900, (844) 972-4636, (713) 935-3760 
customer.service@wallisbank.com 
https://www.wallisbank.com/
 
 
Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) 
There are a number of other non-profit lenders and Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) that are 
great resources to connect with for financing opportunities. Find your nearest CDFI using the online locator . 
 
 
BCL of Texas 
Phone: (888) 718-0180, (512) 912-9884 (Austin 
Office), (214) 688-7456 (Dallas Office),  
(512) 383-0027 (San Marcos Office) 
https://www.bcloftexas.org/ 
 
Capital Impact Partners 
Phone: (512) 957-9007,  
(703) 647-2300 (Headquarters) 
https://www.capitalimpact.org/
  
 
CDC Small Business Finance Corp. 
Phone: (800) 611-5170 
https://cdcloans.com/
 
 
DreamSpring 
Phone: (800) 508-7624 (Customer Service), 
(888) 385-9555 (Payments) 
info@DreamSpring.org 
https://www.dreamspring.org/
 
 
Lendistry 
Phone: (855) 476-5870,  
(888) 594-7270 (Customer Service) 
https://lendistry.com/
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LiftFund, Inc. 
Phone: (888) 215-2373 
info@liftfund.com 
https://www.liftfund.com/
 
 
PeopleFund 
Phone: (512) 472-8087 
https://peoplefund.org/
 
 
TruFund 
Phone: (929) 656-2565 
https://www.trufund.org
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 9  
 
Through its local offices in Texas, the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA)  offers several loan programs that 
can provide financial aid to small businesses. 
 
There are three principal players in most of the programs: the small business applicant, the lender, and the SBA. 
The agency does not provide the loan, rather they guaranty a portion of the loan provided by a lender (except for 
microloans). The lender can be a regulated bank, credit union, or a community -based lending organization. 
 
The business should have its business plan prepared before it applies for a loan. This plan should explain what 
resources will be needed to accomplish the desired business purpose, including associated costs, the applicants’ 
contribution, planned uses for the loan proceeds, collateral, and, most importantly, an explanation of how the 
business will be able to repay the loan in a timely manner. 
The SBA looks for: 
• Ability to repay the loan on time from the projected operating cash flow 
• Owners and operators who are of good character 
• Feasible business plan 
• Management expertise and commitment necessary for success 
• Sufficient funds, including the SBA guaranteed loan, to operate the business on a sound financial basis  
- This includes the resources to meet start-up expenses and the initial operating phase (new 
businesses) 
• Adequate equity invested in the business 
• Sufficient collateral to secure the loan or all available collateral if the loan cannot be fully secured  
Common Requirements: 
• Purpose of the loan 
• History of the business 
• Financial statements for three years (existing businesses) 
• Schedule of term debts (existing businesses) 
• Aging of accounts receivable and payable (existing businesses) 
• Projected opening-day balance sheet (new businesses) 
• Lease details 
• Amount of investment in the business by owner(s) 
• Projections of income, expenses, and cash flow as well as an explanation of the assumptions used to 
develop items 
• Personal financial statements on the principal owner(s) and resume(s) of the principal owner(s) and 
manager(s) 
 
Information on SBA Loans are available on their website. This information is also available at the Texas SBA 
Regional and District Offices. 
 
To view examples of the types of funding programs offered by the SBA, please click here. If
  you have questions about 
any of the programs, please contact your local SBA or SBDC. 
Financing: Federal Programs - Small Business Administration 
10   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
GRANTS.GOV 
A centralized location for grant seekers to find and apply for federal funding opportunities. The website houses 
information on over 2,000 active grant programs and vets grant applications for 26 federal grant-making agencies. 
Small Business Innovative Research/Small Business Technology Transfer Funding (SBIR/STTR) 
The federal government allocates over $4 billion annually to Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and Small 
Business Technology Transfer (STTR) through participating federal agencies. These programs encourage small 
businesses to capitalize on commercialization opportunities. 
 
The SBIR program is a highly competitive program that encourages domestic small businesses to engage in 
Federal Research/Research and Development (R/R&D) that has the potential for commercialization. Through a 
competitive awards-based program, SBIR enables small businesses to explore their technological potential and 
provides the incentive to profit from its commercialization. 
 
The STTR program expands funding opportunities in the federal innovation arena. Central to the program is the 
expansion of the public/private sector partnership to include joint venture opportunities between small business and 
nonprofit research institutions. 
 
To find local resources familiar with SBIR/STTR and can support small business commercialize,  please visit their 
website. 
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) 
USDA’s business programs provide financial backing and technical assistance to stimulate rural business creation 
and growth. Loans, loan guarantees, and grants are available to individuals, businesses, cooperatives, farmers and 
ranchers, public bodies, non-profit corporations, Native American Tribes, and private companies in rural 
communities. For more information, please visit the USDA website.
Financing: Federal Programs 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 11   
The decision regarding business structure is a decision that a person should make, in consultation with an attorney 
and accountant, and taking into consideration issues regarding tax, liability, management, continuity, transferability 
of ownership interests, and formality of operation. The information in this section provides an overview of the most 
commonly utilized for-profit business structures. (Note: For the most current and accurate information on business 
entity formations, visit the Texas Secretary of State’s guide on “Selecting a Business Structure,” or contact the Texas 
Secretary of State.) 
 
SOLE PROPRIETORSHIP: A sole proprietorship is the most common and simplest form of business structure. A sole 
proprietorship exists when a single individual who owns all of the business’s assets engages in business activity 
without the necessity of having to have a formal organization. 
• A sole proprietor is personally liable for all debts and liabilities. Under a sole proprietorship, there are no legal 
distinctions between personal debts and business debts, and there is no requirement to file a separate 
federal income tax return. Business ownership is nontransferable in that an individual cannot transfer his or 
her tax identification number to another person or entity; a new tax identification number will be required. For 
similar reasons, the life of the business is limited to the life of the sole proprietor. 
• A sole proprietorship is often operated under the name of the owner. If a sole proprietorship conducts  
business under a name other than the surname of the individual owner, then it is necessary to file an Assumed 
Name Certificate (commonly referred to as a DBA) with the office of the county clerk in the county where a 
business premise is maintained. If no business premise is maintained, then an assumed name certificate 
should be filed in all counties where business is conducted under the assumed name.  
• Sole proprietorships are not subject to state franchise tax.1 
 
GENERAL PARTNERSHIP: A general partnership is created when two or more persons associate to carry on a 
business for profit. 
• A general partnership requires an annual partnership income tax return be filed (separate from the partners’ 
personal returns). 
• A general partnership operates pursuant to the terms of a partnership agreement. However, there is no 
requirement that the agreement be in writing in order to be recognizable. Nor is there a state filing 
requirement for general partnerships. 
• If the business of the partnership is conducted under an assumed name (a name that does not include the 
surname of all of the partners), then an Assumed Name Certificate (DBA) should be filed with the office of 
the county clerk in the county where a business premise is maintained. Similar to the sole proprietorship, if 
no business premise is maintained, then a DBA should be filed in all counties where business is conducted 
under the assumed name. 
• General partnerships directly and solely owned by individuals are not subject to state franchise tax. 
 
CORPORATION: A corporation is a legal person with the characteristics of limited liability, centralization of 
management, perpetual duration, and ease of transferability of ownership interests.  
• A Texas corporation is created by filing a certificate of formation with the Texas Secretary of State. The 
Secretary of State provides a form that meets minimum state law requirements. Online filing of a certificate 
of formation is provided through SOSDirect. 
• The owners of a corporation are called “shareholders,” and the persons who manage the affairs of a 
corporation are called “directors.”2 A for-profit corporation must register with the Texas Secretary of State. 
  
 
1 Unless single member LLC is filing as a sole proprietor for federal income tax purposes. 
2 However, state corporate law does not provide for shareholders to enter into shareholders’ agreements to eliminate the directors and provide for shareholder 
management. 
Business Entity Formation & Registration 
12   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
• Please note that what is referred to as an “S” corporation is not a matter of state corporate law, but rather a 
federal tax election. A for-profit corporation elects to be taxed as an “S” corporation by filing for this status 
with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Please contact the IRS and/or competent tax counsel regarding 
the decision to elect to file as an “S” corporation for federal tax purposes. This is not a matter that is handled 
by the Texas Governor’s Office.
3 
• Corporations are subject to a state franchise tax. The filing fee for a certificate of formation for a for -profit 
corporation is $300. 
 
PROFESSIONAL CORPORATION: A professional corporation is a corporation that is formed for the purpose of 
providing a professional service, which a typical corporation is prohibited from rendering by law. 
• A “professional service” means any type of service that requires, as a condition precedent to the rendering of 
the service, the obtaining of a license in this state, as well as registration with the Texas Secretary of State. ³  
• Only a professional individual licensed to practice the same professional service as is provided by the 
professional corporation may be a governing person or managerial official of a professional corporation. 
Also note that a professional corporation cannot be formed for the practice of medicine.
4 If the purpose of 
the entity is to provide medical services, the professional may form either a professional association or a 
professional limited liability company. 
• Professional corporations are subject to a state franchise tax. The filing fee for a professional corporation is 
$300. 
 
PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATION: A professional association is a professional entity formed for the purpose of 
providing professional services rendered by a Doctor of Medicine, Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine, Doctor of Podiatry, 
dentist, chiropractor, optometrist, therapeutic optometrist, veterinarian, or licensed mental health professional.5 
• Only a professional individual licensed to practice the same professional service as the professional 
association may be a governing person, managerial official, owner, or member of a professional 
association. Only a governing person of the professional association may serve as the president of the 
association. 
• A professional association must register with the Texas Secretary of State. 
• Professional associations are subject to a state franchise tax. 
 
LIMITED PARTNERSHIP: A limited partnership is a partnership that involves partners that do not have the obligations 
or duties of general partners by reason of being limited partners. 
• In a limited partnership, there will be one or more general partners and one or more limited partners. 
Partners may be individuals, partnerships, corporations, and any other type of legal entity. 6 
• To form a limited partnership, the partners must enter into a partnership agreement and file a certificate of 
formation with the Texas Secretary of State. 
• Limited partnerships are subject to state franchise tax. The filing fee for a certificate of formation for a limited 
partnership is $750. 
 
LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP: A registered limited liability partnership is a general partnership that must be 
registered with the Texas Secretary of State. A partner’s liability in a registered limited liability partnership differs from 
that of an ordinary partnership. 
• In a registered limited liability partnership, a partner is not individually liable, under some circumstances, for 
debts and obligations of the partnership arising from errors, omissions, negligence, incompetence, or 
 
3 A for-profit corporation is governed by titles 1 and 2 of the Texas Business Organizations Code.  Title 1, chapter 3, subchapter A, of the Texas Business Organizations Code 
governs the formation of a for-profit corporation and sets forth the provisions required or permitted to be contained in the certificate of formation. 
4 Texas Business Organizations Code § 301.003(3). A professional association is governed by title 1, title 2, chapters 20 and 21, and title 7, chapters 301 and 302 of the Texas 
Business Organizations Code. Title 1, chapter 3, subchapter A of the Texas Business Organizations Code governs the formation of a professional association and sets forth the 
provisions required or permitted to be contained in the certificate of formation.  
5 A “licensed mental health professional” means a person, other than a physician, who is licensed by the state to engage in the practice of psychology or psychiatric nursing or to 
provide professional therapy or counseling. 
6 A limited partnership is governed by title 4, chapters 151 and 153 of the Texas Business Organizations Code. Title 1, chapter  3, subchapter A of the Texas Business Organizations 
Code governs the formation of an LP and sets forth the provisions required or  permitted to be contained in the certificate of formation.  
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 13   
malfeasance committed in the course of business by others in the partnership, while the partnership is a 
limited liability partnership. 
• The registration of a partnership as a limited liability partnership is effective until the first anniversary of the 
date of registration or the later effective date specified in the application unless  the application is withdrawn 
or revoked at an earlier time or renewed before expiration. 
• Limited Liability Partnerships are subject to state franchise tax. 
• The filing fee for a certificate of formation for a limited liability partnership is $200 per general partner. 
 
LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY (LLC): A limited liability company is created by filing a certificate of formation with the 
Texas Secretary of State.7 
• The limited liability company (LLC) is neither a corporation nor a partnership; rather, it is a distinct type of 
entity. It is an unincorporated business entity which shares some of the aspects of Subchapter S 
Corporations and limited partnerships but has more flexibility than more traditional business entities. 
• The owners of an LLC are called “members.” An LLC may have one or more members. A member can be 
an individual, partnership, trust, and any other legal entity. Unlike the partnership, where the key element is 
the individual, the essence of an LLC is the entity. 
• The LLC is designed to provide its owners with limited liability and pass-through tax advantages without the 
restrictions imposed on Subchapter S Corporations and limited partnerships. Generally, the liability of the 
members is limited to their investment, and they may enjoy the pass-through tax treatment afforded to 
partners in a partnership. 
• LLCs are subject to state franchise tax. Filing fee for a certification of formation for an LLC is $300 
 
The Texas Secretary of State Online Access (SOSDirect) web access system provides subscribers with up-to-date, 
online computer access to a variety of information maintained by the Office of the Secretary of State. For more 
information, please call (512) 463-5555. 
 
FOREIGN OR OUT-OF-STATE ENTITIES: If an organization was formed under, and the internal affairs are governed by, 
the laws of a jurisdiction other than Texas, the organization is a foreign entity.  
 
The Texas Business Organizations Code (BOC) requires the following types of foreign entities to  file an application for 
registration with the Texas Secretary of State in order to “transact business” in Texas: 
• Corporations 
• Limited partnerships 
• Limited liability partnerships 
• Limited liability companies 
• Business trusts 
• Real estate investment trusts 
• Cooperatives 
• Public or private limited companies 
• Any other foreign entity that, if formed in Texas, would be formed as a corporation, limited partnership, 
limited liability company, professional association, cooperative, or real estate investment trust  
Any other foreign entity that affords limited liability under the law of its jurisdiction of formation for any owner 
or member 
 
Helpful resources to determine whether an entity’s activities in Texas require registration include BOC § 9.251, which 
lists activities that are not considered transacting business. Failure to register can result in penalties. To learn more 
about filing as a foreign or out-of-state entity, please visit the Secretary of State website. 
 
7 An LLC is governed by title 3, chapter 101 of the Texas Business Organizations Code, Title 1, chapter 3, subchapter A of the Texas Business Organizations Code governs the 
formation of an LLC and sets forth the provisions required or permitted to be contained in the certificate of formation.  
14   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
REGISTERED AGENT: The Texas Business Organizations Code requires every domestic or foreign filing entity (i.e. 
LLC or corporations) to maintain a registered agent and office in Texas. A registered agent is an agent of the entity 
on whom may be served any process, notice, or demand required or permitted by law to be served on the entity.8 
 
Generally, an individual Texas resident or an organization that is registered or authorized to do business in Texas 
with a business office at the same address as the entity’s registered office may consent to serve as the registered 
agent. Note, an entity may not serve as its own registered agent and the registered office must be a physical address 
in Texas. 
 
BUSINESS NAME, ASSUMED NAME CERTIFICATE, AND LOCAL REGISTRATION: The business name 
selected is the key identifying and marketing component of the business. It should be given much thought and 
consideration. 
 
Assumed Name Certificate: An Assumed Name Certificate, or also referred to a “Doing Business As” (DBA), is 
necessary in order to give notice to the public that the entity is conducting business under that name. Please note that 
neither the filing of a DBA nor the reservation or registration of a company name imparts any real protection to the party 
filing the certificate. It is merely a formal process that informs the general public of the registered agent for a business and 
where official contact with the business can be made.  
 
If, under the Texas Business Organizational Code (BOC), the name chosen is the same as or deceptively similar to, 
or similar to the name of any existing domestic or foreign filing entity, or any name reservation or registration filed with 
the Secretary of State, the document cannot be filed. If you wish the Secretary of State to provide a preliminary 
determination on name availability, you may call  (512) 463-5555, dial 7-1-1 for relay services; or you may email your 
name inquiry to corpinfo@sos.state.tx.us.
 
 
Note: Since final determination cannot be made until the document is received and processed by the Secretary of State, 
do not make financial expenditures or execute documents based on a preliminary clearance. Also note that the 
preclearance of a name or the issuance of a certificate of formation under a name does not authorize the use of a 
name in violation of another person’s rights to the name. 
 
The following types of businesses are required to file an assumed name certificate with the county clerk in each 
county in which a business office is or will be maintained. If the person does not maintain a business office in Texas, 
then in each county in which the person conducts business: 
• Sole proprietorship 
• General partnership or joint venture 
• Estates 
• Real Estate Investment Trusts 
• Any other business entity not included above or those listed below as filing with the Secretary of State. 
 
If a domestic or foreign entity regularly conducts business or renders a professional service in Texas under a name 
other than its legal name (name stated in its certificate of formation or comparable document) , that entity must file a 
DBA with the Secretary of State and with the county clerk in the county where a business premises is maintained.  
 
Note: Secretary of State filings do not need to submit a DBA with an original signature.  
Note: A DBA filed with the county clerk must be sent directly to the appropriate county clerk and must be notarized 
and contain original signatures. If no business premise will be maintained, it should be filed in each county where 
business will be conducted. 
 
Please click here
 for a list of county clerks for each Texas county. For more information on reserving or registering a 
name under the Texas Business Organizations Code, please visit the Texas Secretary of State’s website under 
Business and Nonprofit Forms. 
 
8 The BOC requires that registered agents designated on or after January 1, 2010, must have consented to serve in that capacity in a written or electronic form 
developed by the Office of the Secretary of State. 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 15   
Local Registration: Many county clerk offices will provide a name search service for a nominal fee. Please contact 
the local county clerk for verification of their process. 
 
The whole search process will often be taken care of through the mail. If the county you are seeking to register in 
does not provide this service, and if you have to research in-person  to find out if a name already exists in a 
particular county, search the county records for that exact business name in the assumed name books or computer. 
An assumed name filing is valid for 10 years, so search records for the last 10 years to verify that the name is 
available. If the business name has been used, look in the margin to see if it has been abandoned. If the name has 
been abandoned, it can legally be used again. 
 
Finally, if the company name is available, fill out the assumed name form and have it notarized. Then file it with the 
county clerk’s office. The county clerk will keep the original Assumed Name Certificate, so be sure to request 
several certified copies (at least one for the bank and one for your business records).  
 
For filing fee information and accepted form of payment, contact the local county clerk’s office. Most county clerk 
offices accept cash, certified checks, or money orders. If processing via mail, send the forms by certified mail with a 
return receipt requested to verify receipt by the county clerk. 
 
For more information on name filing, please click here
. 
16   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
An official certification relating to the inactive status of an entity uses different terminology to describe an entity’s 
inactive status. The status description is dependent on the basis for the inactive status of the entity.  The following 
are phrases used on official certifications issued by the Texas Secretary of State that describe an inactive entity 
status. More defined terms of business organizations can be found in the Texas Secretary of State webpage . 
• Canceled: an inactive status used under prior law that was applicable to limited partnerships. This 
status indicates that the relevant Texas or foreign limited partnership filed a voluntary cancellation or 
was involuntarily canceled by the Secretary of State for failing to file its periodic report after notice of 
forfeiture of its right to do business in Texas. 
• Consolidated: an inactive status indicating that a Texas nonprofit corporation has been consolidated 
with one or more other nonprofit corporations. 
• Conversion: An inactive status indicating that the entity has converted into another type of entity or 
to another jurisdiction of domestication. 
• Expired: an inactive status used to indicate expiration of a domestic corporation or limited liability 
company having a specified period of duration. Also used to indicate the expiration of the statutory 
term of duration for a domestic or foreign limited liability partnership registration (12 months), a name 
reservation (120 days), a name registration (12 months), an assumed name certificate (10 years), or 
a trademark registration (10 years). 
• Forfeited Existence: An inactive status indicating that the corporation or limited liability company 
failed to file its franchise tax return or to pay the tax due thereunder. Status is changed by S ecretary 
of State when certification of the delinquency is received from the Comptroller of Public Accounts. 
• Involuntarily Dissolved or Involuntarily Terminated: An inactive status indicating that a Texas 
corporation, professional corporation, professional association, or limited liability company was 
administratively dissolved or terminated for failure to maintain a registered agent, file a report, or pay 
a fee. 
• Judicially Dissolved or Judicially Terminated: An inactive status indicating that a Texas entity was 
dissolved or terminated by court order. 
• Law Repealed: An inactive status indicating that the law applicable to the entity has been repealed. 
The entity was either required to file under another statute or the records regarding the entity were 
transferred to another agency that assumed responsibility for maintenance of those records and 
oversight over the entities transferred. For example, this status applies to trust companies that are 
now on file with Texas Department of Banking and to foreign bank agencies that were required to file 
as foreign financial institutions with the adoption of the Banking Code. 
• Merged: An inactive status indicating that the domestic entity has terminated its existence by merging 
with and into another entity. 
• Terminated: An inactive status indicating that a foreign entity has filed notice that its existence has 
terminated in its jurisdiction of formation. 
• Voluntarily Dissolved or Voluntarily Terminated: an inactive status indicating that a Texas entity 
has filed articles of dissolution or a certificate of termination to terminate its existence.  
• Withdrawn: An inactive status indicating that a foreign entity has surrendered its authority to transact 
business in Texas by filing an application for withdrawal. Also, the status used to describe a limited 
liability partnership that has surrendered its registration prior to expiration of its term by filing a notice 
of withdrawal.
Guide to Status Terminology Used by the Secretary of State 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 17   
 
Fees and Payment Options 
Filing fees for documents submitted under the provisions of the Business Organizations Code are found in Chapter 4. 
The Business Organizations Code requires payment of all fees as a condition of filing. Appendix B sets forth the 
current fee schedule for filings made with and for products and services provided by the Office of the Texas Secretary 
of State. 
Fees may be paid by: 
• Check (personal or firm checks accepted) or money order payable to the Secretary of State through a 
U.S. Bank or financial institution. 
• Credit card (Credit card payments are subject to an additional statutory convenience fee of 2.7% of 
amount charged) 
• LegalEaseSM debit card 
• Prefunded SOS client account 
• Cash (for in-person submissions only) 
Fee Schedule 
Click here to f ind  the current Business Filings & Trademarks Fee Schedule. It has a list of the Information Requests, 
Copies, and Certificates as well as the fees associated with them. 
Business Filings & Trademarks Fee Schedule 
18   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
When starting a business, it is important to determine the federal, state, and local tax obligations for your business. The 
following sections briefly discuss each of these taxation authorities. In determining the tax responsibilities for your 
business, consult an accountant or attorney. 
 
Federal Taxes: The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) is the nation’s tax collection agency. For more information on federal 
taxation, visit the IRS website. 
• An Employer Identification Number (EIN) is also known as a Federal Tax Identification Number and is 
used to identify a business entity. You can apply online for an EIN directly from the IRS in minutes for 
free. If you can't apply online, find out how to apply by phone, fax, or mail. 
• The IRS also provides resources s pecifically  geared to assist small businesses. 
 
State Taxes: The Comptroller of Public Accounts (CPA) is charged with the administration and collection of various 
state taxes. To see a list of the Texas Taxes and Fees collected by the Comptroller, click here. T o file  taxes 
electronically/and or pay, click here. 
• Texas imposes a sales and use tax on all retail sales, leases, and rentals of goods and services that 
are expressly enumerated as taxable under the Texas Tax Code. 
• The Texas Comptroller is also responsible for imposing and collecting a franchise tax, which is 
imposed on each taxable entity that is chartered or organized in Texas or is doing business in Texas. 
However, most small businesses are exempt. 
 
Local Taxes: Business Inventory Tax (also known as property tax or ad valorem tax) is assessed and collected by 
your local County Appraisal District. This tax is assigned to businesses that own tangible personal property used to 
produce income. Business owners are required to report all inventories, equipment, and machinery for assessment to 
their county appraisal district. 
 
However, please note that many school districts, counties, and municipalities do not tax business inventory that falls 
under the “Goods in Transit Exemption” or the “Freeport Exemption.” Click here to view the application f
 or the Goods in 
Transit Exemption. 
 
U
nemployment Tax: The Texas Workforce Commission (TWC) administers the Unemployment Tax program i n 
Texas. This program collects wage information and unemployment taxes from employers subject to the Texas 
Unemployment Compensation Act (TUCA). The taxes support the state’s Unemployment Compensation Fund 
(UCF), a reserve from which unemployment benefits are paid to eligible workers who are unemployed through no fault 
of their own. Unemployment taxes are not deducted from employee wages. 
 
Mos
t employers are required to pay Unemployment Insurance (UI) tax under certain circumstances.  TWC uses 
three employment categories: regular, domestic, and agricultural. 
 
Employer tax liability differs for each type of employment. 
 
For more information, see the next section: “Additional Resources: Unemployment Tax.” 
Tax Responsibilities  
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 19   
 
The Texas Unemployment Compensation Act (TUCA) def ines  which employers must pay unemployment taxes as 
“liable employers.” Liable Texas employers include: 
• Sole proprietorships, partnerships, Limited Liability Companies (LLC), Professional Limited Liability 
Company (PLLC), Limited Partnerships (LP), Limited Liability Partnerships (LLP), Professional 
Corporations (PC), Professional Associations (PA), corporations and foundations, associations, 
trusts, estates, banking institutions, political subdivisions, and governmental agencies.  
 
Liable employers report employee wages and pay the unemployment tax based on state law under the TUCA. Liability 
for the tax is determined by several different criteria. Once wages are paid, employers should register with the Texas 
Workforce Commission (TWC) within 10 days of becoming liable for Texas unemployment tax. 
Who is a Liable Employer? 
Employers who are subject to rules outlined in TUCA are liable to pay unemployment taxes and include any of the 
following: 
• An employing unit that is liable under the Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA) and has Texas 
employees. 
• An employing unit that pays $1,500 or more in total gross wages in a calendar quarter or has at least 
one employee during 20 different weeks in a calendar year regardless of the wages. The employee 
does not have to be the same person for 20 weeks. It is not relevant if the employee is full-time or 
part-time. 
• An individual or employing unit that acquires or otherwise receives, through any means, all or part of 
the organization, trade, business, or workforce of another that was a liable employer at the time of the 
acquisition. 
• An employing unit that is a nonprofit organization as described under section 501(c)(3)  of the IRS 
code and has four or more employees during 20 different weeks in a calendar year.  
• An employing unit that volunteers to become liable even though they do not currently meet the 
required criteria. 
• All political subdivisions of the state of Texas, including municipalities, counties, utility districts, public 
education institutions, etc. 
• An employing unit that paid cash wages of $1,000 or more in a calendar quarter for domestic 
services.  
• An employing unit engaged in farm and ranch labor if: It employs three or more employees for 20 
weeks or more in a calendar year or pays at least $6,250 in total gross wages in a calendar quarter. 
The service is performed on a truck farm, orchard, or vineyard and is performed by a seasonal 
worker. The worker is a migrant or a seasonal worker who works for a farmer, ranch operator, or 
labor agent who employs migrant workers.
  
 
Visit the Texas Workforce Commission's Definition & Types of Employment website for examples of exempt 
services not subject to unemployment tax. It is not enough for the employer and the worker to agree that the worker 
will be treated as an independent contractor. For guidance, see Classifying Employees & Independent 
Contractors and review Employment Status - A Comparative Approach. 
Additional Resources: Unemployment Tax 
20   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
Who is Not a Liable Employer? 
Those Who Hire Independent Contractors: Independent contractors are not considered employees and therefore the 
employer is not liable for paying unemployment taxes for payments to those individuals. It is important to correctly 
classify workers. 
 
It is not enough for the employer and the worker to agree that the worker will be treated as an independent 
contractor. For guidance, see Classifying Employees & Independent Contractors and review Employment Status - A 
Comparative Approach. 
 
Under the common law test, a worker is an employee if the purchaser of that worker's service has the right to direct 
or control the worker, both as to the results and as to the details of when, where, and how the work is done. Control 
need not actually be exercised; rather, if the service recipient has the right to control, employment may be shown.  
 
Employees Paid Through a Professional Employer Organization: If your employees are paid through a Professional 
Employer Organization (PEO), you are not liable to report their wages. A properly licensed PEO is considered the 
employer of all leased workers for purposes of the TUCA. PEOs report wages and pay contributions on all workers 
leased to client companies under the PEO’s TWC account number. 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 21   
 
The State of Texas does not require a general “business” license. All entities that transact business in Texas are 
required to register with the Texas Secretary of State or county clerk’s office. As a result, the certificate of formation 
received from the Secretary of State’s Office, or the assumed name certificate provided by the county clerk’s office, 
satisfies as the “general business license” requirement that exists within other states. Many specific business 
activities require permits or licenses.  
 
The Governor’s Business Permit Office (BPO) as
sists businesses of all sizes in navigating Texas’ permitting, 
licensing, and regulatory environment. The BPO does not issue or administer any licenses or permits. To determine 
which state-level business license or permit is required for your business activity, please see the Texas Business 
Licenses & Permits Guide. T o  contact the BPO, email BusinessPermits@gov.texas.gov or  call  
(512) 936-0100. 
 
I
t is also important to ensure that all permitting requirements are also met at the local level. You can find out about 
these requirements by contacting your local county and city government. 
 
Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (T
DLR) provides oversight for a broad range of occupations, 
businesses, facilities, and equipment. See the complete list of TDLR's occupational and business licensing 
programs on the TDLR Programs pa
ge. 
 
For many licenses, continuing education credits are needed. TDLR’s Continuing Education Department provides 
information on continuing education programs and requirements needed to obtain an occupational license. If you 
have questions about the requirements or the licensing process, please contact TDLR and their team can walk you 
through the process. 
 
Phone: (512) 463-6599 
Toll-Free (in Texas): (800) 803-9202 
Relay Texas-TDD: (800) 735-2989 
 
As a current member of the Armed Forces of the United States, you may use your military experience and training 
to meet the requirements of a Texas occupational license. You will still be required to take any examinations 
required for the license. Please click this link to apply for License Using Military Experience.  
 
 
Business Licenses and Permits 
22   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
The final step in starting a business is determining the federal and state employer requirements.  If you are planning 
on hiring or have already hired employees, you have labor, safety, and tax obligations. Requirements include 
federal and state mandates such as the Americans with Disabilities Act, Equal Employment, safety, wage, and labor 
requirements. 
 
For more information, please visit the Employers Resources page at
 the Texas Workforce Commission's website. 
Click here to f ind your local Workforce Solutions Office. 
 
TWC’s Office of the Commissioner Representing Employers produces a comprehensive reference book, Texas 
Guidebook For Employers. It provides information on basic legal i ssues relevant to hiring, pay and policy, work 
separation, post-employment problems, and employment law-related websites. 
 
T
o request a print version of Texas Guidebook for Employers book, e-mail document.services@twc.texas.gov .  
 
The Commissioner for Employers’ legal team is available Monday through Friday (8 a.m. to 5 p.m.) to answer 
employment law questions. Please contact the Texas Employer Hotline at 1 (800) 832-9394 or 
employerinfo@twc.texas.gov. 
 
Workforce Solutions provide a breadth of services for job seekers and employers. Specifically, for employers, they 
can provide labor market data, information on employment law, and assist in finding and hiring employees. Visit 
your local Workforce Solutions website for a comprehensive list of services available.  
 
Texas Workforce Commission provides training funds to for-profit businesses with fewer than 100 employees to assist 
with increasing competitiveness, upgrade current full-time employee skills, and prepare new hires: $900 for full-time 
existing employees and $1,800 for full-time new employees; employers are also able to participate. 
 
Please reference “Additional Resources: Texas Workforce Commission” in this Handbook or visit the Texas 
Workforce Commission website. 
Business Employer Requirements 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 23   
 
The Texas Workforce Commission is part of the Texas Workforce Solutions network . This statewide network is 
comprised of 28 Workforce Development Boards (Boards). TWC and Workforce Solutions provide integrated 
services for employers and job seekers. Below is a partial list of programs and services available. More information on 
these programs is available on the Texas Workforce Commission website. 
EMPLOYMENT LAW 
Texas Conference for Employers: A  series of seminars held throughout Texas. Topics cover state and federal 
employment laws and the unemployment claim and appeal process. 
Texas B usiness  Today: Q uarterly  newsletter covering issues and interests of Texas employers. 
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS 
WorkinTexas.com: T exas’  largest and most comprehensive online job-search resource, available free of charge, 24 
hours a day, and seven days a week. More than 2.4 million jobs have been posted and over 1.5 million job seekers have 
been hired. Your nearest workforce center can help your business recruit qualified Texans, advertise unlimited job posting 
for free, get assistance with recruiting, and evaluate job market and labor pool. Employers can choose to show jobs 
to veterans only for a 48-hour window. 
 
S
kills for Small Business Program: P rovides training funds to for -profit businesses with fewer than 100 employees 
to assist with increasing competitiveness, upgrade current full-time employee skills, and prepare new hires: $900 for 
full-time existing employees and $1,800 for full-time new employees; employers are also able to participate. Training 
courses are provided by local community or technical colleges, are selected from a catalogue, and can be “in class” or 
“online” courses. To learn more about Skills for Small Business, please contact (877) 463-1777, email 
Skills@twc.texas.gov, or Submit a Contact Request.  
 
Skills Development Fund: C ollaborative  training program customized to the employers’ specific needs. This program 
includes a typical skills development fund grant and customized curriculum. Grant applicant must be a community or 
technical college or a 501C-3 organization in partnership with a college. To learn more about Skills for Small 
Business, please contact (877) 463-1777. 
 
A
pprenticeship Program: S erves  employers and job seekers by training workers for well-paying jobs with promising 
futures. Apprentices are full-time, paid employees who earn while they learn. The Texas Workforce Commission 
grants funds to support the costs of related classroom instruction to registered apprenticeship training programs.  
If a business is i nterested in seeking information regarding the TWC Apprenticeship program, contact: 
apprenticeshiptexas@twc.texas.gov. 
Additional Resources: Texas Workforce Commission 
24   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
VETERAN PROGRAMS 
Texas Operation Welcome Home: This website was created by the Texas Workforce Commission in partnership 
with the Texas Veterans Commission and Texas.gov. It is designed to better meet the needs of Transitioning 
Service Members, recently separated Veterans, and Military Spouses in the Texas.  
 
“We Hire Vets”: A component of Texas Operation Home, is an employer recognition program which recognizes our 
Texas employers for their commitment to hiring veterans. Through this program, employers whose  workforce is 
composed of at least 10% military veterans are eligible to receive a “We Hire Vets” employer recognition decal to 
display on the employer’s storefront as well as electronic decal to display on the employer’s website. You can either 
self-nominate or nominate a business. 
 
Work Opportunity Tax Credit Program
 (WOTC): The Work Opportunity Tax Credit (WOTC) is a federal tax credit for 
businesses that hire people having trouble finding jobs. The U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) and the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) regulate the WOTC program together. WOTC’s goal is to help people get jobs, earn money, 
and pay taxes. 
 
For a summary of workforce related issues, taxes, and programs, visit the Texas Workforce Commission website. 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 25   
 
The Vocational Rehabilitation Program is a federally funded program authorized under Title IV of the Workforce 
Investment Act of 2014, also known as the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended. Texas Workforce Solutions - 
Vocational Rehabilitation Services (TWS - VRS) provides a variety of services that assist eligible people with disabilities 
in preparing for, obtaining, retaining, or advancing in competitive integrated employment. The Texas Workforce 
Commission's Vocational Rehabilitation Division administers the VR program in Texas. An individual with a disability 
must be determined eligible for VR services. A person is eligible for vocational rehabilitation (VR) services if he or 
she meets the eligibility criteria: 
 
• H
ave a disability which results in barriers to employment 
• Need services to discover and prepare for employment 
• Need services to find and get new employment 
• Need services to keep or advance in employment 
VR services are individualized to meet the needs of each participant. Services support the development of 
knowledge, skills, abilities, resources, and behaviors needed to reach the employment goal. A VR counselor will work 
with eligible individuals to develop an individualized plan for employment with a clear vocational goal based on the 
individual's unique strengths, resources, priorities, concerns, abilities, capabilities, interests, and informed choice.  
Self-Employment Services 
Are you interested in becoming your own boss by starting your own business? Self-employment support is available 
to individuals with disabilities in the Vocational Rehabilitation (VR) program.  
 
Ask your VR counselor to explore self-employment career options. From there, your counselor can: 
 
• Explain the application and process for accessing self-employment services 
• Recommend small business and other resources to help you get started 
• Connect you with Certified Business Technical Assistance Consultants who will help you develop a 
business plan 
 
Once you have a business plan, your VR Counselor will work with you to determine what is needed for you to 
achieve successful self-employment. VR Services can help whether you are setting up a new business or if you are 
already a business owner and in need of VR Services. Locate your nearest Texas W orkforce  Solutions - Vocational 
Rehabilitation Services office that pr ovides  services for people with disabilities by searching on ZIP code, city, or county. 
Additional Information: TWC Vocational Rehabilitation Services 
26   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
Workers’ Compensation 
The Texas Department of Insurance’s (TDI) Division of Workers’ Compensation (DWC) regulates the state’s 
workers’ compensation system and certifies employers that want to self-insure. 
 
Texas doesn’t require most private employers to have workers’ compensation insurance. Private employers who 
contract with the government are required to provide workers’ compensation coverage for each employee working 
on the public project. Some private clients may also require their contractors to have workers’ compensation 
insurance. 
 
Employers with workers’ compensation have some important legal protections, including immunity from most 
lawsuits by injured employees. If an employer has workers’ compensation insurance, a lawsuit may only go to court 
after it’s been through TDI’s administrative dispute process. The court will consider TDI’s recommendations and 
only issues in dispute may be used as evidence. Previously resolved issues can’t be reintroduced. The employer’s 
insurance company pays attorneys’ fees and other defense costs. 
Providing Workers’ Compensation 
The Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts (CPA) is c harged with the administration, If employers choose to provide 
workers’ compensation, they must do so in one of the following ways: 
• Buy a workers’ compensation insurance policy from an insurance company licensed by TDI. 
• Be certified by TDI to self-insure workers’ compensation claims. 
• Join a self-insurance group that has received a certificate of approval from TDI. 
Non-subscribers 
Employers who choose not to have workers’ compensation insurance are called non-subscribers. Non-subscribers 
must file an annual notice with TDI; display notices of non-coverage in the personnel office and throughout the 
workplace; and give a written statement of non-coverage to each new employee. Employers without workers’ 
compensation coverage might have to pay high damage awards if they lose a lawsuit. They also lose certain common- 
law defenses, such as arguing that: 
• The injured employee’s negligence caused the injury. 
• The negligence of fellow employees caused the injury. 
• The injured employee knew about the danger and voluntarily accepted it.  
 
For more information on workers’ compensation non-subscribers, please visit the Texas Department of Insurance 
website. 
Commercial Property Insurance 
Commercial property insurance helps businesses, including farms and ranches, pay to repair or replace property that 
was damaged by a fire, storm, or other event covered by the policy. It can also pay some of your lost income if your 
business is unable to operate normally. 
 
There are three types of commercial property policies in Texas. These policies protect against different causes of 
damage, known as “perils.” 
• Basic form policies usually cover common perils like fires and storms, windstorms, hail, lightning, 
explosions, smoke, vandalism, sprinkler leakage, aircraft and vehicle collisions, riots and civil 
commotion, sinkholes, and volcanoes. 
Additional Information: Insurance 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 27   
• Broad form policies usually cover common perils, as well as damage from leaking appliances, structural 
collapse, falling objects, and weight of ice, sleet, or snow. 
• Special form policies usually cover all types of perils except those the policy specifically excludes. 
Typical policy exclusions include damages from flood, earth movement, war, terrorism, nuclear 
disaster, wear and tear, and insects and vermin. 
 
For additional information on commercial property insurance, please visit the 
Texas Department of Insurance 
website. 
Commercial Automobile Insurance 
All automobile drivers in Texas are required to carry proof of insurance, regardless of whether a driver is a business 
owner or not. Several factors should be considered in determining what type of insurance is needed for your 
business, such as: how many vehicle(s) you need to insure; the weight of the vehicle; the kind of vehicle; how the 
vehicle is being used; who drives the vehicle; and who owns the vehicle. 
 
Federal and State CDL requirements apply to all commercial drivers regardless of location and govern issues like 
minimum age limits, physical fitness, written and skills testing, driver licensing, traffic violations, and hazardous 
materials transportation. For more information on commercial automobile insurance requirements in Texas, visit the 
Texas Department of Insurance website
. 
 
For information on the Federal Motor Carrier requirements such as carrier and vehicle safety,  laws, and regulations, 
grants, registration, licensing, and insurance, please visit the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration website
. 
Similarly, for information on the Commercial Driver’s License Program, please click here. 
Small Employer Health Insurance 
Small employers with fewer than 50 full-time plus full-time equivalent employees won’t face a penalty if they don’t 
provide health insurance to their employees, but employers that do must make it equally available to all employees 
working 30 hours or more per week (not on a temporary or seasonal basis) and their dependents. Federal law 
defines a full-time employee as one who works at least 30 hours during a typical work week, or 130 hours per month.  
 
To calculate your full-time equivalent employees, please visit HealthCare.gov
. 
Types of Plans 
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) requires non-grandfathered health insurance coverage in the 
individual and small group markets to cover essential health benefits (EHB). To see the full list of benefit categories, 
please visit their website. 
 
The Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP) is for small employers who want to provide health and/or 
dental insurance to their employees — affordably, flexibly, and conveniently. Below are four reasons to offer SHOP 
Coverage: 
1. SHOP insurance gives you choice and flexibility. You can: 
• Offer your employees one plan, or let them choose from multiple plans 
• Offer only health coverage, only dental coverage, or both 
• Choose how much you pay toward your employees' premiums and whether to offer coverage to their 
dependents 
• Decide how long new employees must wait before enrolling 
2. Get the information you need in one location. You can make an informed decision about your SHOP 
insurance options with the tools at HealthCare.gov: 
• Compare plans and prices
 
• Find out if you qualify for SHOP 
28   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
3. You can work with an agent or broker. You can use your current SHOP-registered agent or broker or find a 
new one to help you enroll in coverage. 
• Find an agent or broker in your area 
4. You may be able to get the Small Business Health Care Tax Credit. Enrolling in SHOP insurance is generally 
the only way for eligible small employers to take advantage of the Small Business Health Care Tax Credit. 
You may qualify if you have fewer than 25 full-time equivalent (FTE) employees making an average of about 
$56,000 or less. 
• See how much your business could save 
 
The essential health benefits are based on a typical plan bought by small employers in Texas. This means that all of 
the benefits requirements for small-employer plans under Texas law were adopted as part of the federal essential 
health benefits standard. Learn more about what Texas law requires here
. Grandfathered plans (those that an 
employer bought before March 23, 2010) aren’t required to contain the essential health benefits, but they do need to 
comply with Texas laws. Also, some types of insurance, such as indemnity policies, aren’t subject to the Affordable Care 
Act (ACA) and don’t count as minimum essential coverage for tax purposes. 
Providing Coverage 
• Employers must give new employees at least 31 days from their start date to enroll in a health plan. 
After this time, employees may be required to wait up to one year for the next open enrollment period 
to join. 
• Insurance companies must offer a 31-day open enrollment period annually. Employers may require 
newly eligible employees to wait up to 90 days before being eligible for benefits. However, the 
insurance company may not charge a premium during this period. 
• COBRA (Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act) provides a way for workers and their 
families to temporarily maintain their employer-provided health insurance during situations such as 
job loss or a reduction in hours worked. COBRA generally requires that group health plans sponsored 
by employers with 20 or more employees in the prior year offer employees and their families the 
opportunity for a temporary extension of health coverage (called continuation coverage) in certain 
instances where coverage under the plan would otherwise end. 
• Employers aren’t required to contribute toward their premiums for former employees, even if they 
previously paid a share. Ask your carrier about your responsibilities regarding continuation notices.  
Paying for Coverage 
The law doesn’t require employers to contribute toward health benefit plan premiums. Many insurance companies, 
however, require employers to pay at least 50% of their employees’ plan premiums. 
• Employers may choose to pay a higher percentage than the company requires.  
• Employers are usually not required to contribute toward the cost of dependent coverage.  
• Premiums may increase at each renewal term because of rising health care costs. 
 
Note: Texas law caps small-employer rate increases due to health factors – such as the amount of employee 
claims experience – at 15% per year. State law also protects businesses who buy small-employer health insurance 
by prohibiting insurance companies from discontinuing coverage without a reason.  
 
Businesses with 25 or fewer full-time equivalent employees that pay at least 50% of premiums and pay average 
annual wages below $50,000 may be eligible for a tax credit of up to 50% (35% for nonprofits) of the premiums the 
business pays if it buys coverage through the federal Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP). 
  
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 29   
How Insurers Calculate Small Employer Plan Premiums 
Insurance companies base the amount employers pay for insurance on the specific benefits package and cost -
sharing levels chosen by the employer. The health status of employees won’t impact rates. Insurance companies 
will consider age of employees, tobacco use, and geographical area in determining rates. 
Buying Coverage through the Insurance Marketplace 
The federal government will operate the insurance marketplace in Texas. Businesses with 50 or fewer full -time plus 
full-time equivalent employees may buy coverage through the Small Business Health Options Program. An 
employer that has SHOP coverage and hires more employees than the threshold will be able to continue coverage 
through SHOP. 
 
For more information about the insurance marketplace, visit healthcare.gov
 or call 1 (800) 318-2596. 
 
  
30   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
OVERVIEW 
The Comptroller’s Statewide Procurement Division connects vendors with state purchasers and contract 
opportunities and helps state and local government entities procure non-IT goods and services through easily 
accessible contracts that meet their needs. With the eprocurement system TxSmartBuy , vendors’ goods and 
services are listed for easy access and ordering by state and local government purchasers. The Comptroller also 
manages and monitors thousands of state contracts to ensure compliance and provide training for state purchasers 
and contract managers. For more information on state procurement procedures, please visit the Texas 
Comptroller’s website. 
How to Register as a Texas Vendor on the CMBL  
1. To register for the Centralized Master Bidders List (CMBL) to be a state vendor, you need to set up 
your eSystems user account. Create User Profile. 
2. Begin CMBL and/or HUB application process:  
• On the eSystems Menu, select the “Apply for CMBL” and continue following the prompts as 
instructed through the registration process.  
• If applying for CMBL, please note that the annual registration fee is $70. After you have 
completed the registration process, you will have the option of submitting the registration fee 
online with a credit/debit card or check/debit (U.S. addresses only) or mailing the payment in for 
processing. 
Vendor Information Center gi
ves you the tools you need to do business with Texas. We’re here to help you 
succeed and guide you to resources that are designed to help your business flourish.  
 
E
lectronic State Business Daily (ESBD) i s an online search engine that lists state contracts over $25,000.  
 
National Institute of Governmental Purchasing ( NIGP) Commodity Book: Bidders are encouraged to become 
familiar with the format and contents of this book as they apply to the Centralized Master Bidders List search 
and vendor profiling. It is extremely important that bidder class-item selections are correct. 
 
T
exas Multiple Award Schedule (TXMAS) is  an alternate purchasing method that has been developed from 
contracts awarded by the federal government or any other governmental entity of any state.  
Texas Procurement and Support Services 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 31   
 
OVERVIEW 
State agencies and universities are constantly looking to work with business certified through the Texas Historically 
Underutilized Businesses (HUB) Program. Texas awarded more than $4.1 billion or (about 12% of state spending) 
in contracts to certified HUBs according to the Fiscal 2024 Annual Report from the Texas Comptroller’s Office. 
 
The Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts Statewide HUB Program certifies qualified small businesses and enters 
into Memorandums of Agreements (MOAs) with other small business-certifying entities to maximize the number of 
HUBs certified. With locations around the state of Texas, these partner organizations  provide the Statewide HUB 
Certification: 
 
• City of Austin 
• City of Houston 
• Dallas/Fort Worth Minority Supplier Development Council (DFWMSDC) 
• El Paso Hispanic Chamber of Commerce (EPHCC) 
• Golden Triangle Minority Business Council (GTMBC) 
• Houston Minority Supplier Development Council (HMSDC) 
• South Central Texas Regional Certification Agency (SCTRCA) 
• Southwest Minority Supplier Development Council (SMSDC) 
• Tri-County Regional Black Chamber of Commerce (TCRBCC) 
• Women's Business Council — Southwest (WBCS) 
• Women's Business Enterprise Alliance (WBEA) 
 
The Comptroller also hosts a comprehensive calendar of events including various Education and Outreach Forums 
(i.e. vendor fairs, spot bid fairs, conventions, conferences, workshops, seminars, etc.) held throughout the state. It is 
also an excellent platform for B2G and B2B networking about public and private-sector procurement processes and 
opportunities. 
 
Click here f
or  the Education and Outreach Forums (EOF) Calendar. 
State of Texas HUB Certification 
32   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
HUB Eligibility 
• An applicant owner must provide proof of at least 51% owned by one or more persons who are an 
Asian Pacific American, Black American, Hispanic American, Native American, American woman, 
and/or Service Rendered Disabled Veteran with a service-related disability of 20% or greater.  
• The applicant owner must be a U.S. citizen, prove at least one year of Texas residency, prove control 
of the day-to-day operations, and hold company title equivalent to ownership and control 
requirements. 
• The applicant business must be primarily based in Texas, prove its principal place of business is in 
Texas, and be a for-profit entity that has not exceeded the size standard prescribed by 34 TAC 
§20.294. 
 
Benefits 
• HUB certification is free of charge. 
• Certification is valid for four years, provided that the business continues to meet the eligibility 
requirements. 
• Business is registered on the Texas Comptroller’s Web-based HUB Directory. State agencies use the 
HUB Directory in conjunction with the Texas Comptroller’s Centralized Master Bidders List (CMBL) to 
solicit bids from certified HUBs for state purchasing and public works contracts. Prime contractors 
also use the HUB Directory to identify HUBs to whom they will send notification of their 
subcontracting opportunities. 
• For purchases of $10,000 or less, state entities can directly contact a business to buy goods and 
services. 
• The Texas HUB Directory is also searched by vendors looking for certified HUBs to include in their 
subcontracting plans for projects of $100,000 or more. 
• Increased exposure to the general public as well as other entities who have a supplier diversity 
program and are searching for minority and woman-owned businesses. 
 
HUB Mentor Protégé Program 
The objective of the HUB Mentor Protégé Program is to provide professional guidance and support to the protégé 
(HUB) in order to facilitate their growth and development and increase HUB contracts and subcontracts with the State 
of Texas. 
 
To be eligible for Protégé participation by state agencies: 
• Eligibility and willingness to obtain HUB certification under the State of Texas HUB Program (Protégé 
must be certified as a HUB prior to SPD listing the Mentor Protégé Agreement on the official list)  
• Business in operation for at least one year 
• Desire to participate with a mentoring firm 
• Ability to identify the type of guidance needed for business development 
• "Good Standing" in doing business with the State of Texas 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 33   
 
The federal government offers tools to help small businesses build their potential to successfully compete in the 
federal sector. These procurement programs include HUB Zone, Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Business, 8(a) 
Business Development, and Women-Owned Small Business (WOSB). More information about these programs can 
be found on the SBA website. Other federal and/or national certifications include Disadvantaged Business 
Enterprise (DBE) and Women Business Enterprise (WBE). These programs are administered by different entities, 
so please contact each agency for information on their programs. 
 
1. Obtain a DUNS Number: To apply for a DUNS number. Note: There is no cost associated with 
applying for a DUNS number. 
2. R egister with the System of Award Management (SAM) . 
3. Know your NAICS codes. 
4. Know your TIN or EIN.  
5. Know your Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes. 
OVERVIEW 
Certifications are not necessary for you to conduct business but can be extremely beneficial in “opening new doors 
of opportunities” in doing business with corporations, the federal government, or prime contractors. Each 
certification has eligibility criteria to determine which is best for your business and your desired market.  
 
Women-Owned Small Business (WOSB) : T o help provide a level playing field for women business owners, the 
government limits competition for certain contracts to businesses that participate in the women’s contracting program. 
• These set-aside contracts are for industries (identified via NAICS code) where women-owned small 
businesses (WOSB) are underrepresented. 
• Some contracts are restricted further to economically disadvantaged women-owned small businesses 
(EDWOSB). The SBA maintains a list of those eligible industries and their corresponding NAICS 
codes. 
• Joining the WOSB Federal Contract program makes your business eligible to compete for federal 
contracts set aside for the program. You can still compete for contract awards under other socio-
economic programs you qualify for. 
 
Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned: T
he federal government aims  to award at least 5% of all federal contracting 
dollars to Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses (SDVOSB) each year. Competition is limited for 
certain federal contract opportunities to businesses that participate in the program. Joining the SDVOSB program 
makes your business eligible to compete for the program’s set-as
ide and sole source contracts . 
• The SBA Veteran Small Business Certification fact sheet w ill help you prepare your application and 
gather the correct documents. Also see the FAQs. 
• To establish an SBA account and apply for certification, visit MySBA Certifications. 
 
8(a) Business Development  Program: T his  program helps participating businesses receive training and 
technical assistance designed to strengthen their ability to compete effectively in the American economy.  
Federal and National Small Business Certifications 
34   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
SBA Mentor-Protégé Program: This SBA program helps eligible small businesses (protégés) gain capacity and win 
government contracts through partnerships with more experienced companies (mentors).  
 
Historically Underutilized Business Zones (HUBZone) : The HUBZone program encourages economic 
development in historically underutilized business zones. 
• Benefits include your business is eligible to compete for the program’s set aside contracts, in addition 
to a 10% price evaluation preference in full and open contract competitions and subcontracting 
opportunities. 
 
Disadvantage Business Enterprise (DBE): The DBE program was created to provide a level playing field by 
providing small businesses owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals a fair 
opportunity to compete for federally funded transportation contracts. 
• There are six certifying agencies throughout the state of Texas that assist in the certification process. 
To view them, please click here. 
• If you receive a DBE certification, you are automatically eligible for the Small Business Enterprise (SBE) 
certification. You may submit a request to the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) Civil Rights 
Division by phone (512) 416-4700 or email them to be listed as an SBE. 
 
Small Business Enterprise (SBE) : The Small Business Enterprise (SBE) Program offers small businesses 
another avenue to maximize their opportunities of doing business with TxDOT. The program applies to highway 
construction and maintenance projects that are funded entirely by state or local funds. 
• If you receive a DBE certification, you are automatically eligible for the Small Business Enterprise (SBE) 
certification. You may submit a request to the TxDOT Civil Rights Division by phone (512) 416-4700 
or email them to be listed as an SBE. 
 
Women’s Business Enterprise (WBE): Third-party certification by Women’s Business Enterprise National 
Council (WBENC). It is recognized by corporations and public entities.  
 
Minority Business Enterprise (MBE): Is a nationally recognized certification issued by the National 
Minority Supplier Development Council (NMSDC). Its mission is to connect minority-owned businesses with 
corporate opportunities. There is a fee for this certification. Please contact NMSDC or discover your NMSDC regional 
affiliate i f you have any questions.  
 
Eligibility Requirements 
 
Women-Owned Small Business (WOSB): 
• Be a small business according to SBA size standards.  
• Be at least 51% owned and controlled by women who are U.S. citizens.  
• Have women manage day-to-day operations and also make long-term decisions. 
• To qualify as an EDWOSB within the women’s contracting program, your business must: 
- Meet all the requirements of the WOSB Federal Contract program. 
- Be owned and controlled by one or more women, each with a personal net worth less than 
$850,000. 
- Be owned and controlled by one or more women, each with $400,000 or less in adjusted 
gross income averaged over the previous three years. 
- Be owned and controlled by one or more women, each $6.5 million or less in personal 
assets. 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 35   
 
 
Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned: 
• Be identified by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) as a Veteran or Service-Disabled 
Veteran. 
• Be considered a small business, as defined by the size standard corresponding to any NAICS code 
listed in the business’s SAM profile. 
• Have no less than 51% of the business owned and controlled by one or more veterans.  
• For certification as a SDVOSB, have no less than 51% of the business owned and controlled by one 
or more veterans rated as service-disabled by the VA.  
• For those veterans who are permanently and totally disabled and unable to manage the daily 
business operations of their business, their business may still qualify if their spouse or appointed, 
permanent caregiver is assisting in that management. 
 
8(a) Business Development Program:
 
• Be a small business. 
• Not have previously participated in the 8(a) program. 
• Be at least 51% owned and controlled by U.S. citizens who are economically and socially 
disadvantaged. 
• Have a personal net worth of $850,000 or less, adjusted gross income of $400,000 or less, and 
assets totaling $6.5 million or less.  
• Demonstrate good character.  
• Demonstrate the potential for success such as having been in business for two years.  
 
SBA Mentor-Protégé Program: 
• To qualify as a protégé, your business must: 
- Be a small business with industry experience. 
- Be organized for profit or as an agricultural cooperative. 
- Have a proposed mentor prior to applying for the program. 
• To qualify as a mentor, your business must: 
- Be organized for profit or as an agricultural cooperative. 
- Be able to carry out its responsibilities to assist the protégé. 
- Possess good character. 
- Not appear on federal list of debarred or suspended contractors 
- Be able to impart value to a protégé firm due to lessons learned, practical experience 
gained or through its knowledge of general business operations and government 
contracting. 
• For the SBA to approve the mentor-protégé agreement: 
- The SBA must determine that the mentor-provided assistance will promote real 
developmental gains for the protégé, not just act as a vehicle to receive federal small 
business set-asides. 
- An applicant protégé and its prospective mentor may not be affiliated at the time of 
application. 
 
36   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
Historically Underutilized Business Zones (HUBZone): 
• Be a small business according to SBA size standards. 
• Be at least 51% owned and controlled by U.S. citizens, a Community Development Corporation, an 
agricultural cooperative, an Alaska Native corporation, a Native Hawaiian organization, or an Indian 
tribe. 
• Have its principal office located in a HUBZone. 
• Have at least 35% of its employees living in a HUBZone. 
 
Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE): 
• Your business must be 51% owned by a socially and economically disadvantaged individual(s).  
• A member of a group of persons that have been identified as disadvantaged by the certifying agency.  
• A firm (including its affiliates) must be a small business as defined by SBA standards. It must not 
have annual gross receipts in excess of the DBE/ACDBE size limits. 
• Only disadvantaged persons having a personal net worth of less than $1.32 million. 
• The business must not be tied to another firm in such a way as to compromise its independence and 
control. 
• Must possess the power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of the firm.  
• Applicants carry the initial burden of proof regarding their eligibility and must demonstrate that they 
meet all requirements concerning group membership or individual disadvantage, business size, 
ownership, and control. 
 
Small Business Enterprise (SBE): 
• Must meet SBA size standards and submit an application online 
 
Women’s Business Enterprise (WBE): 
• Majority (at least 51%) ownership by one or more women.  
• Demonstrated proof of female management and control of business. 
• Unrestricted female control of the business in legal documents and day-to-day operations.  
• A woman holding the highest defined title in the company’s legal documents. 
• Documented evidence of female contribution of capital and/or industry expertise.  
• Status of U.S. Citizenship or Lawful Permanent Resident for woman owner(s) constituting majority 
ownership. 
• You can review the list of required documentation and guidelines outlined in the Standards and 
Procedures. 
 
Minority Business Enterprise (MBE): 
• It requires that businesses are at least 51% owned, managed, and controlled by qualified minority 
group members.  
• A qualified minority group member is a U.S. citizen who is at least 25% Asian-Indian, Asian-Pacific, 
Black, Hispanic, or Native American*. 
• Minority eligibility is established via a combination of document review, screenings, interviews, and 
site visits.  
• Ownership, in the case of a publicly owned business, means that at least 51% of the stock is owned 
by one or more minority group members. 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 37   
 
In addition to the business financing/access to capital services described in the Access to Finance section, the U.S. 
Small Business Administration (SBA) provides free counseling and low-cost training to new entrepreneurs and 
existing businesses. They set goals with other federal departments and agencies to award 23% in prime contract 
dollars to small businesses.  
 
The SBA’s website pr ovides  a variety of resources for the small business owner. Including a resource guide and an 
online learning library with courses on diverse topics. To access the online resources, visit the SBA L earning  Center. 
 
SBA District Offices of
fer business development services and training to help small business start and grow.  The 
SBA also works with a number of local partners to counsel, mentor, and train small business. 
 
• S
CORE pr ovides a wide range of services including training, webinars, online workshops, 
courses on demand, and a library of online resources. 
• T he SBA-guaranteed loan programs hel ps small businesses get funding by setting guidelines for 
loans and reducing lender risk. These SBA-backed loans make it easier for small businesses to 
get the funding they need. 
• S mall Business Development Centers (SBDC)  pr ovide counseling and training to small 
businesses including working with SBA to develop and provide informational tools to support 
business start-ups and existing business expansion. 
• P
rovide assistance  to socially and economically disadvantaged businesses and allowing them to 
become solid competitors in the federal marketplace through business development programs. 
• T.H.R.I.V.E. Emerging Leaders Reimagined i s an intensive executive- level series intended to 
accelerate the growth of high-potential small businesses in America’s underserved cities.  
• T he Office of Women’s Business Ownership ena bles and empowers women entrepreneurs 
through advocacy, outreach, education and support.  
• S pecial  loan programs ar e available for businesses involved in international trade. 
• The SBA offers support for veteran-owned businesses. They have access to funding programs, 
training, and federal contracting opportunities. 
Additional Resources: Small Business Administration 
38   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
To find your local SBA District Office, click here. 
 
Dallas / Fort Worth District Office  
150 Westpark Way, Suite 130 
Euless, TX 76040 
Phone: (817) 684-5500 
 
El Paso District Office
 
211 N. Florence Street., Suite 201  
El Paso, TX 79901 
Phone: (915) 834-4600 
 
Houston District Office
 
8701 S. Gessner Dr. Suite #1200  
Houston, TX 77074 
Phone: (713) 773-6500 
 
Lower Rio Grande Valley (Harlingen) District Office
 
2422 E. Tyler Ave., Suite E 
Harlingen, TX 78550 
Phone: (956) 427-8533 
 
West Texas (Lubbock) District Office
 
1205 Texas Ave., Room 408  
Lubbock, TX 79401 
Phone: (806) 472-7462 
 
San Antonio District Office  
615 E Houston St., Suite 298  
San Antonio, TX  78205 
Phone: (210) 403-5900 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 39   
 
Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs)  
 
America’s SBDC is a non-profit Association that represents America’s nationwide network of Small Business 
Development Centers (SBDCs) — the most comprehensive small business assistance network in the United States 
and its territories. They provide no-cost business consulting and low-cost training to new and existing businesses. 
SBDCs are hosted by leading universities, colleges, state economic development agencies , and private partners, 
and are funded in part by the United States Congress through a partnership with the U.S. Small Business 
Administration. 
 
The mission of America's SBDC is to represent the collective interest of their members by promoting, informing, 
supporting, and continuously improving the SBDC network. SBDC’s consulting and training services include 
business plan development, manufacturing assistance, financial packaging and lending assistance, exporting and 
importing support, disaster recovery assistance, procurement and contracting aid, market research help, 8(a) program 
support, and health care guidance. 
 
To locate the closest SBDC, click here. 
Additional Resources: Small Business Development Centers 
40   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
 
Women's Business Centers (WBCs) represent a national network of entrepreneurship centers throughout the U.S. and 
its territories, which are designed to assist women in starting and growing small businesses. The WBCs provide 
individual counseling, networking opportunities, trainings, and workshops led by subject-matter experts. Each WBC 
offers unique curriculum and programs, so please visit your local WBC t
o find out additional  information.  
 
Brownsville Chamber of Commerce 
Women's Business Center  
1600 University Boulevard 
Brownsville, TX 78520 
Phone: (956) 542-5322 
 
El Paso Hispanic Chamber of Commerce 
Women's Business Border Center  
2401 E Missouri 
El Paso, TX 79903  
Phone: (915) 566-4066 
 
LiftFund - DFW 
Women's Business Center 
8585 N. Stemmons Freeway, Suite M138 
Dallas, TX 75247 
Phone: 1 (888) 215-2373 
 
LiftFund - San Antonio  
Women's Business Center  
600 Soledad St. 
San Antonio, TX 78205  
Phone: 1 (888) 215-2373 
 
Women’s Business Enterprise Alliance 
Women's Business Center  
9800 Northwest Freeway 
Suite 120 
Houston, TX 77092 
Phone: (713) 681-9232 
Additional Resources: Women's Business Centers 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 41   
 
SCORE, supported by the SBA, is a nonprofit association of with more than 10,000 volunteer mentors. SCORE 
offers free small business mentoring. There are mentors in urban, suburban, and rural communities. SCORE can 
help if you are trying to start a business or if you need help with your existing business.  
 
SCORE mentors support your success by providing experienced advice, consulting on best practices, and 
educating you on small business topics. Here are some of the ways you can connect with SCORE and get free 
business advice: 
 
• How it works: To learn about how SCORE mentoring works and look at other Frequently Asked 
Questions, click here. 
• Find a mentor: SCORE's website or search nearby local profiles. 
• Online Workshops: Participate in free online workshops or register for small business webinars. If you 
are interested in participating in a workshop, please visit SCORE's calendar. 
• E-Newsletters: Subscribe to SCORE’s e-Newsletters and get free business resources in addition to 
information about webinars on a range of small business topics.  
Additional Resources: SCORE  Association 
42   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
The APEX Accelerators Program, f ormerly  known as Procurement Technical Assistance Program (PTAP), under 
management of the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) Office of Small Business Programs (OSBP), plays a critical 
role in the Department’s efforts to identify and help a wide range of businesses to enter and participate in the 
defense supply-chain. The program provides the education and training to ensure that all businesses become 
capable of participating in federal, state, and local government contracts. 
 
A
PEX Accelerators can help small businesses with: 
• Complete registration with a wide range of databases necessary for them to participate in the 
government marketplace (e.g., SAM). 
• Identify which agencies and offices may need their products or services and how to connect with 
buying agencies and offices. 
• Determine whether they are ready for government opportunities and how to position themselves to 
succeed. 
• Navigate solicitations and potential funding opportunities. 
• Receive notifications of government contract opportunities on a regular basis.  
• Network with buying officers, prime contractors, and other businesses. 
• Resolve performance issues and prepare for audit, only if the service is needed, after receiving an 
award. 
 
To find your nearest APEX Accelerator, please click here.  
 
Procurement Center Representatives (PCRs) a
ssist small businesses that are trying to win federal contracts. PCRs 
view many federal acquisition and procurement strategies before they’re announced, which enables them to 
influence opportunities that should be set aside for small businesses. They help carry out SBA policies and 
programs, conduct market research, assist small businesses with payment issues, and provide counseling on the 
contracting process. Click here t o find your local PCR.  
 
Commercial Market Representatives (CMRs) w
ork to ensure that small businesses are receiving maximum 
practicable opportunity to participate as Federal subcontractors. CMRs perform reviews of “other than small” 
Federal contractors to ensure their compliance with the goals and objectives in their small business subcontracting 
plans. They provide training to federal agencies and “other than small” contractors on subcontracting plans and their 
reporting requirements. Click here t
o find your local CMR. 
Additional Resources: Federal Contracting Assistance  
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 43   
 
State Bar of Texas 
The Lawyer Referral & Information Service at the State Bar of Texas assists you in contacting an attorney in Texas with 
expertise relevant to an individual’s situation. The Lawyer Referral Service provides access to a range of paid, free, or 
reduced-fee legal resources in your country through this website. You can take a look at the Frequently Asked 
Questions to get further information.   
 
Legal Aid 
Lone Star Legal Aid (LSLA) i s the third largest service provider of free legal aid in the United States. They protect 
and advance the civil legal rights of low-income Texans by providing advocacy, legal representation, and 
community education that ensures equal access to justice. Their clients must meet financial and legal status 
eligibility requirements. The general income limits change annually and can be found by accessing the U.S. Federal 
Poverty Guidelines. 
 
Texas RioGrande Legal Aid (TRLA) i s the nation’s second largest legal aid provider and the largest in Texas. Their 
mission is to provide legal advice and representation to impoverished people. They have a program called the Texas 
Community Building with Attorney Resources (CBAR) that is dedicated to small business and n onprofits. They match 
eligible nonprofits with volunteer attorneys who provide free legal services for matters that do not involve litigation, 
such as incorporation, federal tax exemption, bylaws, contracts, waivers and releases, internal policies, board 
compliance, and other nonprofit legal needs. Please check the map t
o see if you fall within their service area.  
 
Additional Resources: Legal Services 
44   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
Exporting is an attractive way to grow your company's customers, profits, and success. The Texas Economic 
Development & Tourism Office in the Office of the Governor has an International Business & Trade Team that 
supports Texas small and medium-sized businesses with developing new international markets and exporting their 
products and services around the globe. For more information, you can contact an International Business & Trade 
Specialist or call ( 512) 936- 0100. 
 
The U.S. Commercial Service is dedicated to promoting trade with their global network to connect American 
exporters with foreign business opportunities. Their trade professionals are located throughout the U.S. in addition 
to U.S. Embassies and Consulates around the world. They guide companies through every step of the export 
process, from shipping and logistics to learning about foreign regulations. They host local and international events, 
provide export solutions as well as services for new and growing exporters. Check out their How to Export v
ideo 
series to introduce you to key concepts. To locate the closest U.S. Commercial Service Domestic Office in Texas, 
click here. 
 
There is significant opportunity for small businesses to profit through exporting. Nearly 93% of Texas exporters are 
small businesses. There is a wealth of information regarding exporting at the International Trade Administration’s 
website. T he Export Assistance Centers have published a 6-step checklist for those exploring exporting: 
Step 1: Take the Free Export Readiness Self-Assessment 
Many businesses could be exporting but view the process as burdensome or don’t know where to start. This 
questionnaire includes areas to consider when determining your level of export readiness and  provides an initial 
assessment of your exporting needs and capabilities.  
• Resource: Assessment for New Exporters 
Step 2: Training and Counseling 
Basic Guide to Exporting is a resource that businesses have turned to for answers to their questions about how to 
establish and grow overseas markets for their products and services. Whether your firm is new to exporting or in need 
of a refresher on the latest ideas and techniques, it provides the nuts-and-bolts information you need to meet the 
challenges of the world. 
• Resource: Why Companies Should Export 
• Resource: Basic Guide 
• Resource: SBA Export Business Planner 
• Resource: Grow Your Business Guide 
 
You may think exporting is complicated, but the key to export success is to start training and counseling. Training and 
counseling are a multi-phase step. Depending on your assessment score, you will be directed to online and local 
counselors who can help you design a program that will effectively match your specific needs to available training 
opportunities. Before contacting those counselors, you may find it helpful to take an introductory online training 
course or watch pre-recorded webinars to get your feet wet. 
• Resource: Export Education Guide 
• Resource: eCommerce Export Resource Center 
 
For those who want to learn how to start an import/export business as a non-manufacturing company, a U.S. 
government resource is the Small Business Development Center Network and International Trade Centers. 
• Resource: SBDCs and International Trade Centers 
 
 
Additional Resources: Exporting 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 45   
 
For those companies that manufacture a product that is of 51% U.S. origin, contact the U.S. Commercial Service, 
Export Assistance Center to assist in trade counseling, market intelligence, finding partners and more. The U.S. 
Commercial Service provides a network of export and industry specialists located in over 100 U.S. cities and 70 
countries. 
Step 3: Create an Export Business Plan 
Creating an export business plan is important for defining your company’s present status, internal goals, and 
commitment. You learn how to develop an export plan by assembling facts, identifying constraints, and setting 
specific goals and objectives as milestones to success. 
• Resource: Sample Export Plan 
 
Learn the Mechanics of Exporting: Preparing your products for export means complying with U.S. and foreign 
government regulations. 
• Resource: Preparing Your Product for Export 
 
Be aware of legal considerations as you engage your business with new partners or overseas markets.  
• Resource: Legal Considerations 
 
Understand the logistics of shipping and the documents you need to successfully export your products.  
• Resource: Navigate Shipping and Logistics 
Step 4: Conduct Market Research 
Before you export, learn your product’s potential in a given market, the market’s business practices, and the best 
prospects for success. For detailed foreign market intelligence, the U.S. Commercial Service’s Country Commercial 
Guides were written by U.S. Embassy trade experts worldwide and include Market Overview, Challenges, 
Opportunities & Entry Strategies, Political Environment, Selling U.S. Products and Services, Leading Sectors for 
U.S. Exports and Investment, Trade Regulations, Customs and Standards, Investment Climate Statement, Trade 
and Project Financing, and Business Travel. Top Market Reports are available on 27 industry sectors and identify 
best markets. 
• Resource: Market Intelligence 
Step 5: Find Buyers 
Federal, state, and local governments are continually organizing highly focused export events directly putting U.S. 
sellers and potential foreign buyers in direct contact. Opportunities range from meeting foreign buyer delegations at 
select U.S. trade shows to signing up for a foreign trade mission or trade show overseas. Contact your SBDC for 
contact lists or for U.S. manufacturers; look into the Commercial Service Customized Partner Searches, such as the 
Gold Key Matching Service or International Partner Search. 
• Resource: Promote and Expand 
Step 6: Financial Considerations 
Become familiar with how to prepare quotes and prices for your products for export using the appropriate international 
terms of sale. Learn how to effectively get paid by your foreign customers and how to use the U.S. government 
export financing, insurance, and grant programs to help your company finance its transactions and assist in carrying 
your export operations. These resources help small businesses ensure foreign payment and manage or remove risk 
from the equation for both the business and its bank. 
• Resource: Financial Considerations  
• Resource: Texas Department of Agriculture 
46   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
From providing emergency responders to disasters across the state and nation to developing training and practical 
workforce solutions, Texas A&M Engineering Extension Service mak es  a difference worldwide. More than 174,000 
people representing every U.S. state and territory and 109 countries are served annually through on-site and online 
resources for specialties from homeland security to economic development and workforce training. 
 
H
ome to some of the world's top training facilities, the emergency preparedness campus in Bryan/College Station 
includes the Brayton Fire Training Field, Disaster City®, and the Emergency Operations Training Center. 
Customized TEEX training programs develop practical solutions for each client's need through hands -on 
instructional facilities for public utilities, law enforcement, and unexploded ordinance training at the home campus or at 
customer-specified locations worldwide. 
 
The major TEEX programs include fire and rescue, infrastructure and safety, law enforcement, economic and 
workforce development, and homeland security. As a member of The Texas A&M University System, TEEX is unique in 
its ability to access a broad range of emerging research and technical expertise. Beginning with course design and 
development all the way through hands-on instruction and national certification testing, TEEX delivers comprehensive 
training through both classroom and hands-on instruction and as online courses. Hosting services for online 
courses, technical assistance and technology validation, and bilingual training and translation services also are 
available. 
 
By placing safety and wellbeing above all and by focusing on prevention and response, TEEX has become a 
comprehensive training provider through more than 80 years of extension training. Working with other agencies and 
encouraging involvement has led to better fire safety and emergency response, cleaner drinking water, better roads 
and infrastructure, improved homeland security, safer workplaces, heightened public safety and security, new 
therapeutics manufacturing, and the evolution of cyber security. 
 
Through innovative programs and adaptive outreach, TEEX services are created to train the people who expand the 
security, occupational and economic development of Texas and beyond. 
 
Click here t
o contact one of their offices.  
Additional Resources: TEEX Extension Service 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 47   
 
Small business owners and budding entrepreneurs have access to a wealth of free, reliable, and current online 
information at their local library, available 24/7. With a library card, individuals can access digital resources, including 
start-up kits, business plan models, financial forms, industry information and news, high-end market information and 
research, management materials, “how to” videos, and much more. To find your local library, click here. O nce you find 
your local library, ask about the TexShare Small Business Reference Center. The TexShare D atabase, ar e e- resources 
licensed for the exclusive use of Texas libraries and their patrons. 
 
B
usiness Abstracts & Full-Text: Offers full-text articles from hundreds of key publications and provides access to 
product evaluations, interviews, biographical sketches, corporate profiles, statistical rankings, book reviews, and 
reports. 
 
Business Source Complete: It is the second largest database in the Business Score family. It p rovides access to 
1,811 active full-text journals and it supports research in key business areas such as accounting, finance, 
management, marketing, and beyond. Business Source Complete contains detailed author profiles for the 40,000 
most-cited authors in the database. Business Source Complete includes rigorous curation and indexing of open 
access (OA) journals, which has resulted in a growing collection of 1,956 active global OA journals.  Additional full-
text, non-journal content includes business case studies, company profiles, conference papers, country economic 
reports industry reports, market research reports, SWOT analyses, faculty seminars (videos), and mor e. 
 
Regional Business News: Provides full-text regional business publications for the United States and Canadian 
provinces. You are able to search newspapers, magazines, and other resources from trusted news sources.  
 
Small Business Reference Center: Contains hundreds of full-text reference books and full-text magazines. The 
database provides necessary tools and detailed “how-to” instructions to address small business topics, such as 
buying and selling a business, managing employees, writing a business plan, understanding legal information, 
marketing a business, and much more. 
 
Vocational and Career Collection: Provides more than 300 full-text trade and industry-related periodicals. They 
are designed to meet a wide variety of vocational and technical research needs, this database provides full -text 
coverage for trade and industry-related periodicals for high schools, community colleges, trade institutions, and the 
general public. 
 
Other resources currently available through the TexShare Databases include: 
 
Computer Source: Contains nearly 300 full-text journals and magazines covering topics such as computer science, 
programming, artificial intelligence, cybernetics, information systems, robotics, and software. Computer Source™ 
provides a balance of full-text technical journals and full-text consumer computer titles. 
 
Job & Career Accelerator: It provides an easy-to-use search tool with everything patrons and students need to 
find, apply for, and get hired into ideal positions. It delivers information on careers, skills, and interest assessments 
to match individuals with ideal career paths. This platform can help job seekers create professional and 
competitive resumes and cover letters, search for jobs that fit their needs, give professional interviews , and more. 
Additional Resources: Public Libraries 
48   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
Learning Express Library: Designed to help students and professionals at all levels of learning achieve their 
educational and career-related goals. It is an easy-to-use online test prep resource that helps people improve their 
core academic skills, earn a high school equivalency, prepare for college, join the military, obtain occupational 
certification, change careers, become a U.S. citizen, and much more. 
 
Legal Forms: Provides a wide selection of state-specific (and multi-state) legal forms across the most popular legal 
areas. Includes real estate contracts, wills, pre-marital agreements, bankruptcy, divorce, landlord tenant, and many 
others. Many forms are ideal for supporting legal tasks relevant to business owners, such as filing for copyrights, 
patents and trademarks, articles of incorporation, licenses, and more. Also included is a comprehensive attorney 
state directory and a dictionary of legal definitions explained in laymen language. 
 
Legal Information Source: Offers everyday users the necessary tools and detailed how-to instructions covering a wide 
range of legal issues. A majority of the full-text legal reference books are provided through Nolo, a provider of legal 
information for consumers and small businesses. You can search legal forms by popular subject areas, including 
accident, bankruptcy, divorce, personal injury, and more. In addition, users can quickly access a list of links to U.S. 
federal and state legal forms. 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 49   
Texas Veterans Commission (TVC) 
The Texas Veterans Commission works with veterans in eight program areas, including claims, education, 
employment, grants, mental health, women veterans, health care advocacy, and entrepreneurs.  For more 
information on the programs and services, please visit the TVC website. 
 
The Veteran Entrepreneur Program’s (VEP) m ission is to foster and promote veteran entrepreneurship throughout 
the state of Texas. The VEP has a team of experienced business consultants to be available for any veteran in the 
state of Texas to consult with, free of charge to the veteran. They provide counseling services and can provide you 
with tools to start or grow a business. To learn more about the program, you can contact them by email 
vep@tvc.texas.gov or phone at (512) 463-0519. 
 
Veteran’s Hotline: 
Phone: 1 (800) 252-VETS 
info@tvc.texas.gov 
 
Texas Workforce Commission: Texas Veteran’s Leadership Program 
This program is a resource and referral network that connects returning veterans with the resources and tools they 
need to lead productive lives and enjoy the full benefits of the society they have willingly served. 
 
The Veterans Resource and Referral Specialists are assigned to each of the 28 workforce development areas . 
They work closely with Workforce Solutions office staff and the Texas Veterans Commission. This network plays 
an integral role in addressing the needs of returning veterans, including employment, training, medical care, 
counseling, benefits, and other needs. To contact your local Veterans Resource and Referral Specialist, please 
click here. 
Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) 
The Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation works with veterans to verify military experience, service, 
training, or education to be credited towards TDLR licensing requirements. The initial license application and 
examination fees paid to TDLR are waived and the initial license application will be processed in an expedited manner. 
 
For a complete list of services TDLR offers to military service members, veterans, and spouses, please click here . 
 
If you have questions about the process, contact the Customer Service staff at T DLR  and they will walk you through the 
process (what is needed, how to fulfill the requirement, etc.). 
Veteran Loan Fund 
An online platform that connects military veterans and their spouses with mission- focused business lenders and 
education partners. Their mission is to solve the issues veterans and their spouses face as they pursue 
entrepreneurship and small business ownership, through partnerships with business lenders, education partners, 
and digital tools specifically created for veteran entrepreneurs.  
SBA Veteran-Owned Businesses 
The U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) has a multitude of online resources for veterans entering the business 
world. They provide information on funding programs, training, and federal contracting opportunities. Among these 
tools, the SBA provides a Military Reservist Economic Injury Disaster Loan and other loans and grants. 
 
 
Additional Resources: Veteran Resources 
50   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
The Veterans Business Outreach Center (VBOC) program is designed to provide entrepreneurial development 
services such as business training, counseling, and resource partner referrals to service members, veterans, 
National Guard and Reserve members, military spouses, and family members interested in starting or growing a 
small business. SBA's VBOCs offer workshops, training, counseling, and mentorship opportunities in your area. 
VBOCs can also help you navigate SBA’s extensive resource partner network and refer you to a community 
partner, lender, or SBA program. 
 
For more information on how the VBOC program can help your small business and to find your local VBOC, click 
here.  
 
University of Texas - Rio Grande Valley  
1407 E. Freddy Gonzalez-Edinburg 
CESS Bldg., Suite 1.200 
Edinburg, TX 78539 
Phone: (956) 665-8931 
 
University of Texas at Arlington  
701 S. West Street Room 635 
Arlington, TX 76019 
Phone: (817) 272-2011 
 
The Office of Veterans Business Development
 offers programs and services to assist aspiring and existing 
entrepreneurs through training, counseling and education, access to capital, contracting opportunities, and disaster 
assistance. 
• Boots to Business (BRB): An entrepreneurial program offered on military installations around the world 
and a training track of the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) Transition Assistance Program (TAP). B2B 
provides participants an overview of business ownership and is open to service members (including 
National Guard and Reserve) and military spouses. 
• Women Veteran Entrepreneurship Training Program (WVETP): Offers a multitude of in-person and online 
training opportunities, as well as one-on-one advising for women veterans aspiring or actively operating 
small businesses. This LiftFund program is funded in part through a cooperative agreement with the SBA.  
• IVMF - Veteran Women Igniting the Spirit of Entrepreneurship (V-WISE): A two-part program, starting 
with a four-week online course that teaches fundamental business skills to women serving, who have 
served, or serve as military spouses/partners, and outlines a clear path that gets you from where you are 
to where you want to be. A part of this program is Bunker Labs, which provides community and resources 
to support veterans and military spouses.  
• Service-Disabled Veteran Entrepreneurship Training Program (SDVETP): For veterans injured in the line 
of duty who are or want to be small business owners. SBA grants funding for these specialized training 
programs to: 
• Veterans Entrepreneurship Program (VEP) at Oklahoma State University 
• Entrepreneurship Bootcamp for Veterans at St. Joseph's University 
• Warrior Rising, a nonprofit empowering veterans in business 
• Veteran Entrepreneurial Training & Resource Network 
Veteran Contracting 
The Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business program (SDVOSBC) gives procuring agencies the authority to 
set acquisitions aside for exclusive competition among service-disabled, veteran-owned small businesses. Sole source 
awards will be delivered if certain conditions are met. To learn more about eligibility requirements, please click here or 
reference the section “Federal and National Small Business Certification” earlier in this Handbook. 
 
 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 51   
 
Texas Property Taxes and Information on Exemptions for Veterans 
Texas law provides partial exemptions for disabled veterans, surviving spouses, and children of deceased 
disabled veterans. For more information visit: Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business Program 
and Property Tax Assistance. 
 
Federal Resources for Veterans - Online 
To find a full list of federal resources for veterans, click here. 
Federal Resources for Veterans 
 
Veteran Affairs –  
Texas Vet Centers  
Veteran’s Crisis Line:  
Phone: 1 (800) 273-8255 
 
Abilene - Taylor County  
3564 North 6th Street 
Abilene, TX 79603 
Phone: (325) 232-7925 
 
Amarillo 
3414 Olsen Blvd, Suite E 
Amarillo, TX 79109 
Phone: (806) 351-1104 
 
Austin 
1524 South IH 35, Suite 100 
Austin, TX 78704  
Phone: (512) 416-1314 
 
Beaumont - Jefferson County  
1390 West Cardinal Dr. 
Beaumont, TX 77705 
Phone: (409) 347-0124 
 
Corpus Christi 
4646 Corona Dr, Suite 250 
Corpus Christi, TX 78411  
Phone: (361) 854-9961 
 
Dallas 
3B RCS South Central  
Regional Office 
4500 S. Lancaster Rd, Bldg 69 
Dallas, TX 75216 
Phone: (214) 742-8387 
Dallas 
8610 Greenville Ave,  
Suite 125 
Dallas, TX 75243 
Phone: (214) 361-5896 
 
El Paso 
1155 Westmoreland Dr 
Suite 121 
El Paso, TX 79925 
Phone: (915) 772-0013 
 
Fort Worth 
6620 Hawks Creek Avenue 
Westworth Village, TX 76114 
Phone: (817) 921-9095 
 
Killeen Heights 
302 Millers Crossing, Suite 4 
Harker Heights, TX 76548 
Phone: (254) 953-7100 
 
Houston Southwest 
10103 Fondren Rd, Suite 470 
Houston, TX 77096 
Phone: (713) 523-0884 
 
Houston West 
701 N Post Oak Rd, Suite 102 
Houston, TX 77024-3839 
Phone: (713) 682-2288 
 
Laredo 
6999 McPherson Rd, 
Suite 102 
Laredo, TX 78041 
Phone: (956) 723-4680 
Lubbock 
3106 50th St, Suite 400 
Lubbock, TX 79413 
Phone: (806) 792-9782 
 
McAllen 
2108 South M Street 
MedPoint Plaza, Unit 2 
McAllen, TX 78503 
Phone: (956) 631-2147 
 
Mesquite - Dallas County 
502 West Kearney St 
Suite 300 
Mesquite, TX 75149  
Phone: (972) 288-8030 
 
Midland 
4001 W. Illinois 
Midland, TX 79703 
Phone: (432) 697-8222 
 
Pantego - Tarrant County 
3337 West Pioneer Pkwy 
Pantego, TX 76013 
Phone: (817) 274-0981 
 
San Antonio NE 
9504 N IH 35,  
Suite 214 & 219 
San Antonio, TX 78233  
Phone: (210) 650-0422 
 
San Antonio NW 
9910 W Loop 1604 N  
Suite 
126 
San Antonio, TX 78254  
Phone: (210) 688-0606 
 
 
52   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Office of Small & Disadvantages Business Utilization  
• Small Business Programs  
• Doing Business with VA  
• Veteran Entrepreneur Portal  (Starting & Expanding a Business) 
U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA)  
• Service-Disabled Veterans 
• Starting a Veteran-Owned Business 
• SBA Loans 
• SBA Disaster Assistance 
Texas Property Taxes/Information on Exemptions for Veterans 
• Exemptions  
• Disabled Vets 
Legal Assistance 
• Legal Hotline for Texans/Veterans Hotline: (800) 622-2520 
• Army JAG 
• Navy JAG 
• Air Force JAG  
• Marine Corps JAG 
• National Organization of Veterans’ Advocates, INC.  
• U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (Search for Accredited Attorneys) 
• Texas Lawyers for Texas Veterans  
• Texas Bar Resources for Veterans 
• Texas State Bar Military Law Sections  
• StatesideLegal 
• U.S. Department of Justice  
Other Resources 
• Federal Benefits for Veterans, Dependents and Survivors 
• The American Veterans and Service Members Survival Guide 
• Programs for Service Members Returning from Afghanistan and Iraq 
• Veterans Business Outreach Centers 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 53   
 
Job Accommodation Network (JAN): A service of the U.S. Department Labor’s Office of Disability Employment 
Policy (ODEP). It pr ovides  individualized technical assistance, consulting, and mentoring services to individuals with 
disabilities, family members, and service providers. JAN can provide a resource packet tailored to each individual’s 
specific goals and has consultants available throughout all stages of the process who can provide guidance and 
support. 
 
T
exas Workforce Commission Vocational Rehabilitation Program h elps  people with disabilities prepare for, 
find, or retain employment. The program also helps businesses and employers recruit, retain, and 
accommodate employees with disabilities. For more information, contact (512) 936-6400 or find your local 
office. 
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES FOR SELF-EMPLOYMENT: 
The handbook has a comprehensive information on the available resources. However below is a summary of a few 
of the resources and programs designed to support entrepreneurs and small business owners throughout Texas:  
• U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA): T
he SBA is an independent agency of the federal 
government that assists small businesses in starting, building, and growing their businesses. The 
SBA has an online library of resources including webinars and guides on diverse topics including 
finance, business planning, and federal contracting. 
• S
CORE : S CORE is a nonprofit association dedicated to offering free small business advice, 
educating entrepreneurs, and helping small businesses start, grow, and maintain their businesses. 
• S mall Business Development Centers (SBDCs) : A merica’s SBDC advisors provide aspiring and 
current small business owners with a variety of free business consulting and low-cost training 
services including: business plan development, manufacturing assistance, financial packaging and 
lending assistance, exporting and importing support, disaster recovery assistance, procurement and 
contracting aid, market research help, 8(a) program support, and healthcare guidance. 
• W omen’s Business Centers (WBCs) : R epresent a national network of entrepreneurship centers 
throughout the United States and its territories, which are designed to assist women in starting and 
growing small businesses. 
• A
PEX Accelerators : T hese  centers provide local, in-person counseling and training services to small 
business owners. They are designed to provide technical assistance to businesses that want to sell 
products and services to federal, state, and/or local governments. 
• T exas Workforce Commission:  H as many programs available that are designed to support small  business 
owners, including a legal hotline, workforce development funding, and local support through their partnering 
Workforce Solutions offices. 
• Texas Secretary of State: H as  detailed information on how to register a business with the Secretary of State 
including applicable forms and payment information. They have an online business service called 
SOSDirect. If you have any questions, you may contact them by email at SOSDirect@sos.texas.gov or  by 
phone at (512) 463-5555. 
• T exas  Comptroller’s Office: T he Comptroller is the chief steward of the S tate's finances, acting as tax 
collector, chief accountant, chief revenue estimator, and chief treasurer for all of state government. The 
Comptroller’s Office has information on applicable state taxes, including sales and use tax permits, franchise 
tax, as well as resale tax certificates. 
Additional Resources: Persons with Disabilities 
54   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
Small business is big business in Texas.  
 
Texas is known for its entrepreneurial spirit and rich history of innovation. Today, the Lone Star State boasts the Best 
Business Climate in the nation. Home to more than 3.3 million small businesses that employ nearly half of all working 
Texans, our state is focused on developing an environment where entrepreneurs have the freedom to aspire, grow , 
and prosper. 
 
In 2024, small businesses created 386,267 net new jobs in Texas. 
 
Workforce 
With a steadily growing civilian workforce of over 15 million people, Texas businesses have an extensive pool of 
candidates from which to hire highly educated and skilled workers. The Texas Workforce Commission offers  several 
programs designed to help employers assist employees in upgrading their skills through skills development, 
apprenticeship, on the-job training, literacy education, and other training programs for developing highly skilled and 
productive employees. 
 
All types of businesses flourish across Texas. Many regions in Texas boast large, existing concentrations of 
companies in a particular industry . This creates a trained labor force from which other businesses can draw. As a 
result, regions with existing labor pools continue to spur new business expansions and relocations in those sectors.  
Cost of Doing Business 
With no corporate tax or personal income tax, companies doing business in Texas enjoy one of the lowest overall 
tax burdens in the country. In addition, Texas offers lower business operating cost when compared to other U.S. 
states. The Lone Star State is committed to upholding its position as the Best State for Business and Best Business 
Climate in the nation. 
Exports 
As the top exporting state for 23 years in a row in 2024, Texas continues to be a leader in international trade. Small, 
medium, and large businesses alike have found great success in doing business globally. Nearly 93% of all Texas 
exporters are small businesses. 
Infrastructure and Access 
• Texas is the nation’s gateway to global trade—by air, land, and sea:  
- Home to 23 seaports, 12 deep-water ports  
- Port of Laredo is the No. 1 port in the U.S.  
- Port Houston is the top U.S. port for waterborne tonnage. 
• Texas is investing $240 million in port infrastructure and connectivity projects. 
• Texas is home to 35 foreign trade zones, more than any other state. 
• In 2023, Texas voters approved:  
- $5 billion for a Texas Energy Fund  
- $1 billion in water funding  
- $1.5 billion for broadband infrastructure funding  
• With lower energy and land costs and fewer land-use restrictions, Texas offers operating cost 
advantages for businesses and a more affordable cost of living for employees.  
 
To see what others are saying about Texas, check out the Top Texas Touts page. N
ote: Unless otherwise noted, all 
statistics and facts are available at gov.texas.gov.
Small Business Touts 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 55   
 
Federal 
TY General Switchboard: (800) 877-8339 
 
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)  
www.usda.gov 
Office of Small and Disadvantaged  
Business Utilization (OSDBU): 
1400 Independence Avenue, S.W. 
Washington, DC 20250 
Phone: 1 (833) ONE-USDA 
 
Federal Bankruptcy Court  
www.txs.uscourts.gov 
Southern District 
United States Courthouse  
515 Rusk Avenue 
Houston, TX 77002 
Phone: (713) 250-5500 
 
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms,  
and Explosives (ATF) 
www.atf.gov  
Houston Field Office 
5825 N. Sam Houston Parkway W, Suite 300 
Houston, Texas 77086 
Phone: (281) 716-8330 
 
U.S. Coast Guard (USCG)  
www.uscg.mil 
Sector Houston-Galveston  
13411 Hillard Street 
Houston, TX 77034 
Primary Phone: (281) 464-4800 
 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) 
www.occ.gov 
Southern District 
500 North Akard Street, Suite 1600 
Dallas, TX 75201 
Phone: (214) 720-0656 
 
Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) 
www.cpsc.gov/ 
Toll-Free Consumer Hotline 
Phone: (800) 638-2772 
TTY (301) 595-7054 
 
U.S. Customs Service 
https://www.cbp.gov/trade/centers-ex cellence-and-
expertise-information 
Information Centers of Excellence and Expertise  
Phone: (866) 295-7624 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)  
www.dea.gov 
Houston Division 
1433 West Loop South, Suite 600 
Houston, TX 77027-9506 
Phone: (713) 693-3000 
 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)  
www.epa.gov/ 
1445 Ross Avenue, Suite 1200 
Dallas, Texas 75202 
Phone: (785) 532-6026 
 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  
www.fda.gov/  
10903 New Hampshire Ave 
Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002 
Phone: (888) 463-6332 
 
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) 
www.uscis.gov/  
Dallas Field Office 
6500 Campus Circle Drive East  
Irving, TX 75063 
Phone: (800) 375-5283 
 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS)  
www.irs.gov/  
825 E. Rundberg Lane.  
Austin, TX 78753 
Phone: (844) 545-5640 
 
Federal Trade Commission (FTC)  
www.ftc.gov/ 
600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20580 
Phone: (202) 326-2222 
 
U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT)  
www.dot.gov/ 
1200 New Jersey Ave, SE  
Washington, DC 20590 
Phone: (202) 366-4000 
 
U.S. Department of the Treasury  
www.treasury.gov/ 
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, D.C. 20220 
Phone: (202) 622-2000 
   
Index A: Entity Contact Information as provided by Texas.gov 
56   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
State 
For a complete listing of state agencies,  
go to Texas.gov. 
 
Texas State Affordable Housing Corporation (TSAHC) 
www.tsahc.org/  
6701 Shirley Avenue 
Austin, TX 78752 
Phone: (512) 477-3555 
 
Texas Department of Agriculture 
www.texasagriculture.gov
/ 
1700 North Congress Avenue, 11th Floor 
Austin, TX 78701 
Phone: (512) 463-7476 
 
Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (TABC) 
www.tabc.state.tx.us/
 
5806 Mesa Drive 
Austin, TX 78731 
Phone: (512) 206-3333 
 
Texas Appraiser Licensing &  
Certification Board (TALCB) 
www.talcb.texas.gov/
 
1700 North Congress Avenue, Suite 400 
Austin, TX 78701 
Phone: (512) 936-3001 
 
Texas Commission on the Arts 
www.arts.texas.gov/
 
920 Colorado Street, Suite 501 
Austin, Texas 78701 
Phone: (512) 463-5535 
 
Office of the Attorney General (OAG)  
www.texasattorneygeneral.gov/
 
300 West 15th Street 
Austin, TX 78701 
Phone: (512) 463-2100 
 
State Auditor’s Office (SAO)  
https://sao.texas.gov/
 
1501 North Congress Avenue 
Austin, TX 78701  
Phone: (512) 936-9500 
 
Texas Department of Banking (DOB) 
www.dob.texas.gov/
 
2601 North Lamar Boulevard 
Austin, Texas 78705 
Phone: (512) 475-1300 
 
State Bar of Texas 
www.texasbar.com/ 
Texas Law Center 
1414 Colorado Street 
Austin, TX 78701 
Phone: (512) 427-1463 
 
 
 
Texas School for the Blind and Visually Impaired (TSBVI)  
www.tsbvi.edu/
 
1100 West 45th Street 
Austin, TX 78756  
Phone: (512) 454-8631 
 
Cancer Prevention and Research Institute  
of Texas (CPRIT) 
https://cprit.texas.gov/
 
1701 North Congress Avenue, Suite 6-127 
Austin, TX 78701 
Phone: (512) 463-3190 
 
Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts 
https://comptroller.texas.gov/
 
111 East 17th Street 
Austin, TX 78774 
Phone: (800) 531-5441 
 
Office of Consumer Credit Commissioner (OCCC) 
https://occc.texas.gov/
 
2601 North Lamar Boulevard 
Austin, TX 78705 
Phone: (512) 936-7600 
 
Texas Credit Union Department (TCUD) 
https://cud.texas.gov/
 
914 East Anderson Lane 
Austin, TX 78752 
Phone: (512) 837-923 
 
Texas School for the Deaf (TSD) 
www.tsd.texas.gov 
1102 South Congress Avenue 
Austin, TX 78704 
Phone: (512) 462-5353 
 
Texas Council for Developmental Disabilities (TCDD) 
www.tcdd.texas.gov/
 
6201 East Oltorf Street, Suite 600 
Austin, TX 78741 
Phone: (512) 437-5432 
 
Texas Division of Emergency Management (TDEM) 
https://tdem.texas.gov/
 
2883 Highway 71 East 
Del Valle, TX 78617 
Phone: (512) 424-2208 
 
Texas Education Agency (TEA) 
https://tea.texas.gov/
 
1701 North Congress Avenue 
Austin, TX 78701 
Phone: (512) 463-9734 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 57   
Texas Center for Educational  
Technology (TCET)  
https://tcet.unt.edu/home 
University of North Texas 
Discovery Park, G150 
3940 North Elm Street 
Denton, TX 76207 
Phone: (940) 369-7572 
 
Texas Ethics Commission 
www.ethics.state.tx.us/ 
201 East 14th Street, 10th Floor 
Austin, TC 78701 
Phone: (512) 463-5800 
 
Finance Commission  
www.fc.texas.gov/ 
2601 North Lamar Boulevard 
Austin, TX 78705  
Phone: (512) 936-6222 
 
Texas A&M Forest Service 
https://tfsweb.tamu.edu/
 
200 Technology Way #1281 
College Station, TX 77845  
Phone: (979) 458-6608 
 
Office of the Governor (OOG) 
https://gov.texas.gov/business
 
Texas Economic Development & Tourism 
Office (EDT) 
P.O. Box 12428 
Austin, TX 78711 
Phone (512) 463-0100 
 
Health and Human Services  
Commission (HHSC)  
www.hhs.texas.gov/
 
4601 W. Guadalupe Street 
Austin, TX 78751 
Phone: (512) 424-6500 
 
Health Professions Council (HPC) 
www.hpc.texas.gov
 
333 Guadalupe St, Suite 2-220 
Austin, TX 78701  
Phone: (512) 305-8550 
 
Department of State Health Services (DSHS)  
www.dshs.texas.gov 
1100 West 49th Street 
Austin, TX 78756 
Phone: (512) 776-7111 
 
Texas Historical Commission (THC) 
https://thc.texas.gov/
 
1511 Colorado Street 
Austin, TX 78701 
Phone: (512) 463-6100 
 
 
 
Texas House of Representatives  
https://house.texas.gov/
 
1100 North Congress Avenue  
Austin, TX 78701 
Phone: (512) 463-1000 
 
Department of Housing and Community Affairs 
www.tdhca.texas.gov/
 
221 East 11th Street  
Austin, TX 78701 
Phone: (512) 475-3800 
 
Department of Information Resources (DIR) 
www.dir.texas.gov/
 
300 West 15th Steet, Suite 1300 
Austin, TX 78701  
Phone: (512) 475-4700 
 
Office of Injured Employee Counsel (OIEC) 
www.oiec.texas.gov 
1601 Congress Avenue 
Austin, TX 78701 
Phone: (866) 393-6432 
 
Office of Public Insurance Counsel (OPIC) 
www.opic.texas.gov/  
1601 Congress Avenue, Suite 3.500 
Austin, TX 78701  
Phone: (512) 322-4143 
 
Texas Department of Insurance (TDI)  
www.tdi.texas.gov 
1601 Congress Avenue 
Austin, TX 78701  
Phone: (512) 676-6000 
 
Veterans Land Board 
https://vlb.texas.gov/
  
1700 Congress Avenue 
Austin, TX 78701  
Phone: (800) 252-8387 
 
General Land Office (GLO)  
www.glo.texas.gov 
1700 North Congress Avenue 
Austin, TX 78701  
Phone: (512) 463-5001 
 
State Law Library (SLL) 
www.sll.texas.gov
 
205 West 14th Street, Room G01 
Austin, Texas 78701 
Phone: (512) 463-1722 
 
Texas Legislative Council (TLC)  
www.tlc.state.tx.us/
 
1501 North Congress Avenue  
Austin, TX 78701 
Phone: (512) 463-1155 
 
58   |  GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK   
 
Legislative Reference Library  
www.lrl.state.tx.us/ 
1100 Congress Ave, Room 2N.3  
Austin, TX 78701 
Phone: (512) 463-1252 
 
Texas House of Representatives 
https://house.texas.gov/
 
P.O. Box 2910 
Austin, Texas 78768-2910 
 
Texas Library and Archives Commission 
www.tsl.state.tx.us/
 
1201 Brazos Street 
Austin, TX 78701  
Phone: (512) 463-5474 
 
Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation 
(TDLR)  
www.tdlr.texas.gov/ 
920 Colorado Street 
Austin, TX 78701  
Phone: (512) 463-6599 
 
Texas Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV)  
www.txdmv.gov 
4000 Jackson Avenue 
Austin, TX 78731  
Phone: (888) 368-4689 
 
Texas Geographic Information Office (TxGIO) 
https://tnris.org/
 
1700 North Congress, Room B -40 
Austin, TX 78701 
Phone: (512) 463 -8337 
 
Texas Commission on Environmental  
Quality (TCEQ)  
www.tceq.texas.gov/
 
12100 Park 35 Circle 
Austin, TX 78753  
Phone: (512) 239-1000 
 
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department 
https://tpwd.texas.gov/
 
4200 Smith School Road  
Austin, TX 78744 
Phone: (512) 389-4800 
 
Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners 
https://tsbpe.texas.gov
/ 
929 East 41st Street 
Austin, TX 78751 
Phone: (512) 936-5200 
 
Texas Department of Public Safety 
https://www.dps.texas.gov/
 
5805 North Lamar Boulevard  
Austin, TX 78752  
Phone: (512) 424-2000 
Public Utility Commission of Texas (PUC) 
www.puc.texas.gov/ 
1701 North Congress Avenue, Suite 7-110 
Austin, TX 78701  
Phone: (512) 936-7000 
 
Office of Public Utility Counsel (OPUC) 
https://opuc.texas.gov/
 
1701 North Congress Avenue, Suite 9-180 
Austin, TX 78701  
Phone: (512) 936-7500 
 
Railroad Commission of Texas (RRC) 
www.rrc.state.tx.us/
 
1701 North Congress Avenue 
Austin, TX 78701  
Phone: (877) 228-5740 
 
State Office of Risk Management (SORM) 
www.sorm.state.tx.us/
 
300 West 15th Street, 6th Floor 
Austin, TX 78701 
Phone: (512) 475-1440 
 
Department of Savings and Mortgage Lending 
(SML) 
www.sml.texas.gov 
2601 North Lamar Boulevard, Suite 201 
Austin, TX 78705  
Phone: 1 (877) 276-5550 
 
Texas Secretary of State (SOS)  
www.sos.state.tx.us/
 
1100 Congress Ave, Capitol Building,  
Room 1E.8  
Austin, TX 78701 
Phone: (512) 463-5770 
 
Texas State Securities Board (SSB) 
https://ssb.state.tx.us/ 
208 East 10th Street, 5th Floor 
Austin, TX 78701 
Phone: (512) 305-8300 
 
The Texas Senate 
https://senate.texas.gov/ 
1100 Congress Avenue, Capitol Building 
Austin, TX 78701 
Phone: (512) 463-0200 
 
Texas Skill Standards Board (TSSB)  
https://tssb.org/
 
1100 San Jacinto Boulevard, Suite 100 
Austin, TX 78701  
Phone: (512) 936-8100 
 
Texas State Soil and Water Conservation Board (TSSWCB) 
www.tsswcb.texas.gov/
 
1497 Country View Lane  
Temple, TX 76504 
Phone: (254) 773-2250 
 
GOVERNOR’S SMALL BUSINESS HANDBOOK | 59   
 
State Fair of Texas 
https://bigtex.com/supporting-texans/ 
3921 Martin Luther King, Jr., Boulevard 
Dallas, TX 75210 
Phone: (469) 945-3247 
 
Office of State-Federal Relations (OSFR) 
www.gov.texas.gov/organization/osfr
 
660 Pennsylvania Avenue SE, Suite 203 
Washington, D.C. 20003 
Phone: (202) 638-3927 
 
Texas Department of Transportation (TXDOT) 
www.txdot.gov/
 
6230 East Stassney Lane 
Austin, TX 78744 
Phone: (512) 463-8588 
 
Texas A&M University 
https://www.tamu.edu/
 
400 Bizzell Street 
College Station, TX 77843 
Phone: (979) 845-3211 
 
Texas Travel Alliance 
https://texastravelalliance.org/ 
9600 Escarpment Boulevard  
Suite 745-40 
Austin, TX 78749 
Phone: (512) 328-8842 
 
Texas.gov 
www.texas.gov/ 
100 Congress, Suite 600 
Austin, TX 78701  
 
Texas A&M Transportation Institute (TTI) 
www.tti.tamu.edu 
3135 TAMU 
College Station, TX 77843 
Phone: (979) 317-2000 
 
University of Houston  
www.uh.edu/ 
4300 Martin Luther King Boulevard 
Houston, TX 77204  
Phone: (713) 743-2255 
 
University of Texas at Austin 
www.utexas.edu/
 
110 Inner Campus Drive 
Austin, TX 78712 
(512) 471-3434 
 
Texas Veterans Commission (TVC) 
www.tvc.texas.gov/ 
1700 N Congress Ave, Ste 620 
Austin, TX 78701  
Phone: (512) 463-6564 
 
 
Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) 
www.twdb.texas.gov/
 
1700 North Congress Avenue 
Austin, TX 78701  
Phone: (512) 463-7847 
 
Texas A&M AgriLife Extension Service 
https://agrilifeextension.tamu.edu/
 
600 John Kimbrough Boulevard, Suite 509 
7101 TAMU 
College Station, TX 77843 
Phone: (979) 314-8200 
 
Texas Workforce Commission (TWC) 
www.twc.texas.gov/ 
101 East 15th Street 
Austin, TX 78778 
Phone: (800) 628-5115
 
 
 
This handbook is intended to provide general guidance and assistance to those interested in 
developing or further expanding their business in Texas and beyond. It is not intended to be 
construed or relied upon as legal, accounting, or other professional services or advice. Every 
effort has been made to make this publication as complete as possible, but by no means can all 
subject matters, rules, regulations, and resources involved in commerce be covered in one 
document. Please be aware the information contained herein is subject to change without notice. 
If uncertain as to how to proceed on any given matter, legal or other professional services should 
be sought. 
 
This handbook was created with substantial assistance from many resources outside and inside 
the Office of the Governor. Every effort was made to accurately source these tools and other 
tools that are available to small businesses in Texas. For additional copies of this handbook, or 
for additional information on any of the topics covered, please call (512) 936-0100.
 
Disclaimer 
   
 
   
 
 
