    sbdcmichigan.org       |       1
Brought to you by the Michigan
Small Business Development Center
Guide to Starting 
and Operating a 
Small Business
Business 
experts 
helping you 
succeed.

2       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Welcome! 6
Starting a Business
Are You Ready to Start a Business? 
Step 1: Self-Assessment: Are You Ready to Start a Business?
Steps to Starting a Small Business  
Step 2: Select a Business Idea 
Step 3: Perform Market Research  
Market Research Checklist  
Step 4: Refine and Reevaluate Your Business Idea — Is It Viable?
Step 5: Analyze Your Startup Costs 
Step 6: Refine and Reevaluate Your Business Idea — Is It Feasible?  
Step 7: Write Your Business Plan
Step 8: Complete the Startup Checklist  
Step 9: Secure Financing for Your Business 
Step 10: Start Your Business 
1
Michigan SBDC Business Plan Outline
Section 1: Company Introduction and Description 
Section 2: Market Analysis    
Section 3: Management and Operations 
Section 4: Financials      
Section 5: Appendices
Final Touches
2
Business Legal Issues
Attending to Legal Issues Is Crucial for Planning and
Operating Your Business 
Choosing and Filing a Legal Structure for Your Business  
Selecting and Registering a Business Name    
Protecting Your Business’ Intellectual Property   
Licenses, Permits and Business Regulations   
Navigating Michigan’s Business Regulations   
Business Taxes and Withholding     
Streamline Your State Taxes with Michigan Treasury Online 
Business Insurance        
Special Considerations for Selling to the Government  
Procurement Technical Assistance Centers (PTAC) Can Help
With Government Bidding
Becoming a State of Michigan Contractor 
Small Business Certifications
3
7
7
8
9
10
14
16
17
22
23
24
26
26
28
28
32
34
35
36
38
38
44
45
46
46
48
50
51
52
52
53
54
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       3
Financial Management  
The Benefits of Financial Management    
Bookkeeping      
Cash Flow and Cash Flow Projection    
Financial Recordkeeping       
Other Recordkeeping       
Take Cybersecurity Seriously      
Ransomware Attack Dos and Don’ts     
Create Separate Bank Accounts for Your Business
4
Marketing Your Business  
What Defines Your Brand? 
Setting a Marketing Budget      
Creating a Marketing Plan
Developing Your Message 
The Four Ps of Marketing      
Publicity and Public Relations  
The Power of Online Marketing 
Using Your Website to Grow Your Business 
Attract New Business Through Social Media 
Consider Pay-Per-Click (PPC) Advertising and Other Paid Online
Advertisement to Gain New Visitors to Your Site
Managing Online Reviews
5
Hiring Your First Employee
Craft Your Hiring Strategy    
The Importance of Professional Assistance
Employee vs. Contractor    
Training and Developing Employees 
Create Clear Expectations With an Acceptable Use Policy
New Hire Reporting Requirements    
Payroll Taxes      
Ensure Your Compliance with Employment Laws and Regulations
Health and Safety Standards    
Required Workplace Posters for Michigan 
Required Federal Workplace Posters  
6
56
57
58
58
58
60
62
63
66
67
68
74
76
77
78
79
81
82
85
88
89
89
91
91
91
92
94
96
97
98

4       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Start and grow your business with the help of a Business Consultant! The Michigan SBDC’s team 
provides one-on-one consulting, business education, market research and technology commercialization to 
entrepreneurs in all 83 counties. 
 
Starting a small business can feel tough, but you don’t have to do it alone! The Michigan SBDC is here to 
connect you with insight and resources to help your small business succeed. Contact the Michigan SBDC 
for assistance with:
  Business Plan Development
  Market Research
  Raising Capital
  Business Education – In-Person & Online Training
  Technology Commercialization
  Financial Management
  Export Strategy
  Strategic Planning
  Human Resources & Organizational Development
 
michigansbdc.org
Michigan Small Business 
Development Center
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       5
CHAPTER 1   //  PERSONAL ASSESSMENT
1
STARTING A 
BUSINESS
6       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Though this guide is not a substitute for legal or financial counsel, it is an informational  
resource designed to make the process of starting and operating a business in Michigan a little  
less overwhelming.
The information in this guide was accurate at the time of publication, but it is subject to change due to 
revisions in law and administrative policies. Between published revisions, an online version is updated 
periodically if significant changes occur. The online version can be accessed at:
michigansbdc.org/guidetostarting
 
In addition to this guide and the talented professionals at the Michigan SBDC, other resources are 
available for starting and operating a business in Michigan:
  U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA)
  Michigan Economic Development Corporation (MEDC)
  Assistance from local economic development organizations, trade associations, chambers of 
    commerce, schools, community colleges, universities and public libraries
The Michigan SBDC is ready to help! For more information or to contact any of our offices located 
around the state, visit:
michigansbdc.org
Welcome
Helping businesses launch and grow is a focus of the Michigan Economic Development Corporation 
(MEDC), state government, and all of us here at the Michigan Small Business Development Center 
(MI-SBDC). At the Michigan SBDC, we provide small business assistance across the state, including 
counseling, training, and research to help small businesses launch, grow, transition, and innovate. This 
guide outlines many of the steps, responsibilities, issues, and challenges facing entrepreneurs, and it 
seeks to answer your most common questions.
  The steps for starting a business
  Different ways to organize your business
  Key elements of a business plan
  Complying with federal, state, and local tax obligations
  Basics related to management, hiring, and marketing
  And more!
Information included in 
this guide is both general 
and Michigan-specific. 
It covers topics such as:
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       7
Are You Ready to Start a Business? 
Being your own boss is an exciting idea, but self-employment isn’t for everyone. If you’re thinking about starting 
a business, you’ll want to consider whether you’re suited for it, both personally and professionally. 
This self-evaluation is designed to help you think through your personal, professional, and financial readiness for 
self-employment. It will help you:
  Assess your reasons and qualifications for going into business
  Set personal and business goals
  Consider if this is the right time to start a business
  Determine if you have the freedom, flexibility, and resources to start a business
  Evaluate your health and stamina
  Plan how you will balance family and business obligations 
There are no right or wrong answers to these questions. Bring the answers to this assessment to your Michigan 
SBDC consulting sessions. It will provide insights about you and your business readiness to help make the 
most of your time with us. To self-assess, ask yourself the following questions and answer as honestly and in as 
much detail as possible.
1   Why do you want to start (or continue growing) a business?
2   What kind of business do you want to launch or expand?
3   Why do you think you can make this type of business work?
4   Why do you think this type of business is sustainable?
5   Do you have the necessary education, skills, and experience to succeed in this industry?
6   Are there additional qualifications you should obtain before you start your business, and how 
      can you achieve them?
7   What is the true purpose and/or goal you hope to accomplish with this business?
8   What is the financial goal you are seeking to achieve?
9   Will you need financing, and do you have the high credit score, assets, collateral and financial history 
      to be eligible for financing?
10  What are your personal and professional strengths?
11  What are your personal and professional weaknesses?
12  How would you describe your physical, mental, and emotional health and stamina?
13  What knowledge and skills do you have to start and manage the day-to-day operations of a business?
14  Do you know and understand the technology necessary to be competitive in this industry?
15  Do you generally have good judgment in people and ideas?
16  What sacrifices and risks are you willing to take to be successful?
17  How will you balance your personal life and business demands?
Personal Assessment
Self-Assessment: Are You Ready to Start a Business?STEP 1:
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
8       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Steps to Starting 
a Small Business
Once you have completed a self-assessment, you have already completed 
the first step toward launching your business! Now, you may be wondering 
what your next steps are. There is a logical sequence of actions for starting a 
business that includes 10 steps in the following order:
Perform a 
Self-Assessment
Select a
Business Idea
Perform Market 
Research
Refine or 
Reconsider Your 
Business Idea
Analyze Your 
Startup Costs
Refine or 
Reconsider Your 
Business Idea
Write Your 
Business Plan
Complete the 
Startup Checklist
Secure Financing for 
Your Business
Start Your 
Business!
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
In the sections that follow, each step after 
the first is outlined in detail. The convenient 
checklist at the end of this chapter 
summarizes all of them to help you stay on 
track, manage the various steps and consider 
all the essentials.
1 2 3 4
5 6 7 8
9 10
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       9
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
STEP 4:
You first need to decide what type of business to start. Ask yourself the
following questions:
  What are you good at?
  What do you love to do?
  What skills do you have that you can capitalize on?
  What problems do people have that you can help solve?
  What unmet needs do you see and how can you help address them?
Don’t assume the first business idea you have is your best one. Try to make a list of 5–10 
distinct business ideas and evaluate which ones fit with the personal assessment you just 
created. Then, you can determine the greatest opportunities for your business ideas through 
market research. 
Select a Business IdeaSTEP 2:
10       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
STEP 3: Perform Market Research
The first and most important task you need to accomplish before you start your business is 
determining if your idea is feasible. Market research is the process of gathering facts and 
statistics to make an informed decision about the market potential for your business. It also 
helps you understand the prospects for success and the direction your business should take. 
Market research is crucial both at the start of your business and as your business evolves. 
You’ll also need to decide, broadly, who your primary customer is going to be. Businesses 
typically fall into two general categories:
Business-to-Consumer (B2C) Companies
B2C companies primarily sell products and services directly to consumers. Any time you 
purchase something for yourself, you’re likely buying from a B2C company of some kind. 
Grocery stores, art galleries, hardware stores, lawn service providers, and pizza parlors are all 
examples of B2C organizations.
Business-to-Business (B2B) Companies
B2B companies primarily sell products and services to other businesses. Suppliers, parts 
manufacturers, marketing agencies, technology companies, and many others fall into the 
B2B category.
Some businesses may do a bit of both. A farm, for example, might sell their produce to 
a restaurant (B2B) and sell it directly to individuals at a farmers market (B2C). You can 
determine the greatest opportunities for your initial business idea through market research.
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
Did You Know?  
Michigan SBDC Consultants can help you access 
secondary research at no cost to you!

    sbdcmichigan.org       |       11
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
Industry Research  
Industry research will help you understand the big picture of what’s happening in relation to your type of 
business. For example, a pizza palor may look for answers to questions like:
 
  How many pizzas get sold in the U.S., Michigan or your local area each year?
  Have pizza sales been increasing or decreasing in recent years?
  What trends exist related to specialty pizzas, healthier alternatives, changes in sizes, packaging, etc.?
  Are more pizza parlors going in (or out of) business in recent years?
In other words, what does the big picture look like for the pizza world?
Researching Market Size and Customers
The market includes the total population of consumers or businesses that may be interested in buying 
your product or service; meanwhile, customers are those who actually do buy. Within a market, there will 
be specific groups of customers who will represent the greatest percentage of your sales, and you can 
generally define them by a common set of characteristics. These groups of customers who share common 
characteristics are called market segments.
Questions to answer when performing market research for market size and customers include:
  How many people and businesses are buying food in the area or location you’re 
    considering? (This is the total market size.)
  How often do they buy food?
  Which segments are most likely to buy and how big are they?
If you multiply the number of likely customers by their purchasing frequency and by the price of their 
purchases, it will give you some idea of the market potential for your product or service. For example, if you 
have 100 potential customers near your business who each order 20 pizzas per year, and if you charge 
an average of $15 for a pizza, you would be looking at $30,000 in potential revenue (100 customers * 20 
pizzas per year * $15 = $30,000 per year).
Competition Research
Your competition includes two types of businesses. Direct competitors sell a product or service that is 
exactly like yours. Indirect competitors sell products or services that are similar or alternative to yours. 
Questions about your competitors might include:
  Where are other pizza shops located? 
  What are they like? 
  What other foods and alternative food options exist, and where are they located? 
  Why would prospective customers buy your pizza and not choose other options?
  Is there an unmet need where you are hoping to establish your business?
  Are you offering something totally unique in this space?
  Are potential customers dissatisfied with other choices for a reason that you can improve upon?

12       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
The Library  
Often, the best source for market research is still the library. Many locations have Business-specific 
Librarians and space dedicated to business reference materials. Wherever possible, look for information 
in sources and references related to your type of business. Some publications in which you might find 
information include:
  Trade association publications
  Trade journals and industry publications
  The Encyclopedia of American Industries
  The Encyclopedia of Global Industries
  Economic census reports such as the Census of Retail Trade, Census of Wholesale Trade or  
    Census of Service Industries
  Other governmental statistic sources published by federal, state, and local agencies
  Annual Statement Studies from the Risk Management Association (RMA)
The Internet 
You may also be able to find helpful tools and resources on the internet. To get the most out of internet 
searches, try to define your search terms as precisely as possible and use other online research strategies:
Make a list of all the keywords and strings of keywords associated with your type of business.
Keep track of which searches you have performed already so you don’t end up duplicating your efforts later.
Save time by visually scanning search results to see if a site contains potentially significant information. 
If a site has good information, print out the materials so you can refer to them later and cite the source in your 
business plan. Start by using trusted websites that can provide insight into competitors:
mel.org
 thomasnet.com
Primary Sources
You may also need to hit the pavement and do some research with primary sources. Examples include:  
Industry Experts and Successful Business Owners
Talk to people in the industry. You can gain valuable insights about opportunities and challenges by 
speaking to people who know the industry from the inside.
You may also consider finding a mentor. A good mentor could be someone who owns a successful 
business like the one you want to start. Ideally, they won’t be a direct competitor, and they will operate 
outside the geography of your intended area.
Surveys
Build and conduct a survey or focus group to gather information from businesses or potential customers.
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
Where can you find this type of information? Unfortunately, it’s rarely all in one place. Instead, you will 
probably need to invest some meaningful time and energy into the research phase of your business 
venture. Some useful sources, tools, and resources for market research include the following:
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       13
Visit Potential Competitors
Observe your closest competitors from the perspective of a customer. This will help you gain insights about what 
matters most when customers are purchasing a product or service. Analyze your competition’s business model 
to identify their strengths, which you’ll have to work hard to overcome, and weaknesses, which you can turn into 
opportunities for your business.
Similarly, you may want to investigate competitors’ websites, marketing efforts, and advertising. Study what they do, 
the image they present, and the style of their marketing to get a sense of what you can do to distinguish yourself. 
Paid or Hired Research
Many companies will conduct market research for a fee and can easily be found online — along with reviews of their 
work. Keep in mind that high-quality research typically costs a lot. 
If you are looking for a cheaper option and live near a school that offers business courses, you may be able to find 
instructors who are looking for “real world” projects for their students. You can identify professors teaching those 
courses at nearby schools and contact them directly, or you can ask your Michigan SBDC Consultant if they might 
introduce you. Timing may be an issue because they may need to plan your market research project into their course, 
and it might take several months before that could happen.
Regardless of where or how you get your information, becoming 
a good market researcher is a valuable business skill for you to 
acquire. Market research is the basis for evaluating potential 
opportunities and analyzing the ever-changing factors affecting 
your business at its start and as you grow.
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
14       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
B2C Customer Research
  Size of the population
  Predominant gender
  Age(s)
  Ethnicity
  Education level
  Occupation or job title(s)
  Income level
  Average amount of debt
  Home ownership status
  Car ownership status
  Marital status
  Family status (number of children)
  Pets (type and number)
  Preferred media (magazines, newspapers, social media, television, radio, mobile phone, etc.)
  Purchase preferences (in person, internet, phone, catalog, etc.)
  Product or service characteristics that are valued most by the purchaser
  Payment preference (cash, credit, etc.)
  Frequency and quantity of purchase(s)
  Average dollars spent annually on this type of purchase
  Customer preferences and perceptions about quality, convenience, branding, image, 
      exclusiveness, mass appeal, etc.
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
Industry Research
  
  Size of the industry
  Growth potential of the industry
  Historical trends in growth or losses
  Seasonal or economic trends
  Professional associations within the industry
  Other related industries
  Distribution channels
  Opportunities
  Threats
Market Research Checklist 
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       15
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
Market Research
  Best opportunity: businesses (B2B), consumers (B2C) or a combination of both?
  Total number of potential buyers
  Segments (groups with similar attributes)
  Segment(s) with the greatest need and/or demand
  Market trends: political, social, environmental, seasonal, etc.
B2B Customer Research
  Industries, markets or segments
  Products or services
  Number of employees
  Length of time in business
  Geography and location(s)
  Purchasing patterns (how much, how often, etc.)
  Purchasing process
  Outsourcing patterns, policies, etc.
  Local, national or international purchaser
  Economic factors that influence the market
  Government policies that influence the market
Competition Research
  Direct competitors
  Indirect competitors
  Potential future competitors
  Annual sales and revenue
  Marketing methods, advertising methods, and results of both
  Geography and location(s)
  Distribution channels
  Outsourcing patterns, policies, etc.
  Sources for production, services, inventory, etc.
  Strengths of your business’ competition
  Weaknesses of your business’ competition
  Opportunities (especially for differentiation)
  Other notes
16       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Refine and Reevaluate Your Business Idea — Is It Viable?
Once you’ve gathered and reviewed your market research, you can make data-driven 
decisions about your business. The important question to try and answer at this stage is this: 
Should you refine your business idea based on your market research?
To answer that fundamental question, you’ll need to answer other questions such as:
  Is there a need or opportunity in the marketplace for your products or services?
  Who are your most valuable customers, and what problems do your products or 
    services solve for them?
  What is your value proposition (definition on pg. 70)? Why would a customer buy from you 
    instead of a competitor or alternative provider?
If you can answer those questions confidently, then now is the time to start making some 
revenue projections for your business. To get started, create a pricing “menu” for all your 
company’s products and services. Make sure to include the expected margins for all 
products and your fee schedule for all services.
As an example, let’s say you’re an electrician. You plan to charge $80 per hour each visit 
plus an additional $60 per hour after the first hour. If you expect 10 visits per month for 
the month of June, with 6 of those visits lasting 1 hour and 4 of them lasting 2 hours, your 
projected revenue for June would be:
($80 x 10 hours) + ($60 x 4 hours) = $800 + $240 = $1,040
Once you’ve created initial revenue projections, you’ll have some basis to decide whether 
your small business will generate enough sales to achieve your personal and business goals.
STEP 4:
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
As you evaluate your business 
idea, make sure you are 
considering the facts and 
making decisions based on 
what you know, not what 
you think or feel.

    sbdcmichigan.org       |       17
Lacking funds right now doesn’t mean you’ll never 
be able to start a business — it just means you need 
to rethink how you’ll start your business.
Businesses commonly fail during the first year because they hit a financial wall before opening 
or soon after. Many different factors contribute to these failures, and most of them are related 
to financial planning. For example:
  Business owners may fail to estimate the true cost of starting the business they have in mind.
  Business owners discover that it will cost more money than they have in order to get the 
    business open or keep the doors open.
  Business owners have unrealistic expectations about available resources. Grants, tax 
    incentives and startup loans are typically scarce, competitive and difficult to obtain.
  Business owners have unrealistic expectations about how quickly they will start making 
    money. Most businesses need sources of cash to stay afloat until they start making money.
In order to avoid these common financial missteps, you need a well-researched estimate of 
what it will cost to start the business you have in mind. With an accurate analysis of your costs, 
you can align the reality of your available resources with your expectations about the feasibility 
of your business. Based on your financial situation, you may need to refine or reconsider your 
idea.
Most businesses start by “bootstrapping”: using their existing resources to work toward a 
larger goal. Working on your business part-time, developing a group of loyal customers, and 
other strategies can help you build slowly but steadily until you can achieve your vision. Every 
large business started as a small business, and every business succeeds by growing one 
customer at a time.
On the next page, we have included a startup cost analysis worksheet that you can use to 
estimate how much funding you will need to launch your business.
Analyze Your Startup CostsSTEP 5:
After market research and careful consideration, most entrepreneurs adjust their original 
concept in some way. Usually, they reduce the scale of their idea, especially when they allow 
for the possibility that sales will develop more slowly than expected.
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS

18       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
STARTUP COST ANALYSIS SUMMARY  
LAND AND BUILDINGS
Down payment or lease costs
Closing costs
Remodeling or buildout
Utility deposits
Other
EQUIPMENT
Furniture
Fixtures
Production machinery or equipment
Computers and software
Telecommunications equipment
Cash registers or POS systems
Signage and installation
Other
MATERIALS AND SUPPLIES
Starting inventory
Production materials and components
Office supplies
Other
MARKETING, IMAGE AND BRANDING
Marketing and design assets
Advertising budget
Promotional items and activities
Other
OPERATION FEES AND EXPENSES
Professional fees (accountant, lawyer, etc.)
Patent and trademark fees
Insurance (health, life, fire, liability, etc.)
Licenses and permits
Trade association memberships
Other
 
PERSONAL LIVING EXPENSES
From last paycheck to opening day
3-6 months after opening day
Moving expenses
Other
CASH RESERVE AND CONTINGENCY FUNDS
Opening expenses
Wages, salaries, and taxes
Other
TOTAL
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
Some of the following 
items may not apply to 
your business
For each item on this 
list, you should have an 
accompanying list of 
itemized details
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       19
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
  Personal Financial Resources  
Evaluating your personal finances and assets is a good 
way to start understanding your current financial situation. 
Common forms of personal financial resources include:
• Liquid cash in checking and savings accounts
• Financial potential from selling assets, like a vehicle
• Funds you could receive as a gift (or investment) 
  from friends and family
• Home equity
• Credit cards
• Cash value of life insurance
• Cash value of retirement investments
• Income from a full-time or part-time job while you 
  build your business
Utilizing any of your personal financial resources carries 
risk. The more time and energy you invest into planning, 
analysis and refining your business idea, the easier it will 
be to thoughtfully consider the risks and potential benefits 
of investing your personal finances into your business.
FUNDING YOUR BUSINESS
Now that you’ve estimated your costs, it’s time to start figuring out how you will raise funding for your business. In the 
following section, we’ll discuss various options to secure small business funding. 
  GRANTS  
 
Are you hoping for a grant? We’ve all seen infomercials, 
ads and websites telling us about “millions in free 
money” for startups and small businesses. The myth of 
“free money” has been around for decades, and clever 
scammers often extract a hefty fee without delivering the 
results you sought. Federal and state government grant 
programs exist, but grant funding rarely goes directly to 
businesses or individuals. 
Virtually all state or federal grant money flows to local 
governments, state agencies, and non-profits with highly 
restrictive eligibility requirements to help support regional 
or community programs.
If you still want to look for grants, you can
search at:
You can also search the U.S. Small Business 
Administration (SBA) grants section at
However, keep in mind that government grants are 
funded by your tax dollars and, therefore, require very 
stringent compliance and reporting measures to ensure 
that the money is well spent. Some business grants are 
available through state and local programs, nonprofit 
organizations and other groups. These grants are not 
necessarily free money, and they usually require the 
recipient to match funds or combine the grant with other 
forms of financing, such as a loan.
sba.gov/funding-programs/grants
grants.gov
20       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
  LOANS
Traditional and non-traditional lenders use specific criteria 
to qualify or reject business loan requests. The following 
are key lender considerations:
Credit History
Lenders and financiers are looking for reliable borrowers 
who have demonstrated responsibility and have a high 
credit score (typically 650 and above) over a period of at 
least 3-5 years. 
Cash 
Lenders expect you to be invested in your own business 
and pay 20%-30% of the total startup cost either as cash 
or cash plus equity investment.
Collateral
Lenders also expect you to pledge assets against the loan 
that have a net value greater than the loan amount. Note 
that “purchase value” isn’t the same as “resale value.” 
Banks and other lenders may discount the value of 
brand-new equipment to an amount they think they could 
get if they sold it to satisfy the debt.
  COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTIONS (CDFIS) 
Community development financial institutions (CDFIs) 
are private financial institutions that provide loans to 
small business owners, entrepreneurs and community 
organizations that might not qualify for traditional financing. 
Many CDFIs focus on serving low-income, disadvantaged 
and underserved communities. CDFIs are certified by 
the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund 
(CDFI Fund) at the U.S. Department of the Treasury, which 
provides funds to CDFIs through a variety of programs.
  SBA LOANS
The SBA does not directly provide loans. However, a 
variety of loan guarantee and other support programs are 
available through commercial lenders and CDFIs.
For more information, visit:
sba.gov/funding-programs/loans
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       21
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
CROWDFUNDING    
Crowdfunding is a form of raising 
money to support ideas or projects. 
With crowdfunding, contributions 
or loans from individuals or 
interested parties are collected and 
distributed via a networked and 
publicly observable platform. It is 
being used to support artists and 
journalists, political campaigns, 
charitable causes, new inventions, 
entrepreneurship, scientific research 
and more. Various platforms offering 
this type of funding can be found on 
the internet. State and federal rules 
governing these kinds of solicitations 
and securities are always evolving. 
If you’re considering crowdfunding, 
make sure to seek professional 
advice from a qualified financial 
advisor.
Three Primary Types of Crowdfunding Exist:
Donation-Based Crowdfunding
Any crowdfunding where contributors receive no return could be 
considered donation-based crowdfunding. These campaigns are typically 
reserved for charities, disaster relief, helping people pay for medical bills, 
and similar causes.
Rewards-Based Crowdfunding
With rewards-based crowdfunding, contributors get a reward such 
as a product or service that the company receiving donations will be 
creating. By offering a reward, entrepreneurs can retain ownership of their 
business. However, it comes with some risks. Will you be able to fulfill all 
your reward commitments? Will the costs of fulfilling the rewards sink your 
business below the profitability threshold? Will your investors become 
repeat buyers? Again, more research, analysis and planning will help you 
accurately determine how much money you will need to raise and how 
feasible providing your rewards will be for the long-term health of your 
business.
Equity-Based Crowdfunding
Equity-based crowdfunding (also known as ownership-based 
crowdfunding) allows investors to become part-owners of your 
business and receive a return on their investment as well as dividends 
or distributions based on a share of your business’ profits. Equity 
crowdfunding is still a complex work in progress at the federal level with 
the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). 
In Michigan, the state legislature passed legislation called the “Michigan 
Invests Locally Exemption” (MILE). This allows small businesses to raise 
capital by reaching out to Michigan residents to invest in their companies. 
Many regulations govern this type of funding, and serious consequences 
can come from violations of federal or state regulations. For more 
information on MILE and crowdfunding, visit the State of Michigan’s 
website at michigan.gov and search for “MILE crowdfunding.”
1
2
3
Regardless of what type of crowdfunding you are considering, thoroughly research the advantages and 
disadvantages, and consult an attorney or finance professional who is knowledgeable and experienced in 
crowdfunding. In addition, it is extremely important to consult with a securities attorney for guidance before 
pursuing equity crowdfunding.
22       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Again, after you’ve carefully reviewed and analyzed the costs associated with starting your 
business, you can make data-driven decisions about moving forward. The important question 
to try to answer at this stage is this: Should you refine your business idea based on your 
financial situation? 
In order to answer that fundamental question, you will need to answer other questions like:
  Will investing in your business idea put you in financial jeopardy?
  Can you justify the financial risk with the potential business value of your idea?
  Will you be able to generate enough sales in a reasonable amount of time to offset the 
    costs of launching your business?
After financial analysis and careful consideration, most business owners adjust their original 
concept. Usually, they reduce the scale of their idea, especially when they allow for the 
possibility that expenses will likely be higher than estimated.
Refine and Reevaluate Your Business Idea — Is It Feasible?STEP 6:
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       23
GAIN FINANCING AND INVESTORS   
If you seek financing or investment, lenders and 
investors require a written business plan. A complete 
business plan provides information they need and 
clearly communicates your plan. Their decisions about 
investing in your business will be based on all the 
information in your business plan, not just the financials.
CONSOLIDATE ALL YOUR INFORMATION  
Ideas and thoughts in your head aren’t a plan. The 
process of putting a business plan together helps you 
synthesize all of the information you have gathered and 
organize it in one place. Developing a comprehensive 
business plan forces you to see your business project 
in its entirety, including its strengths and shortcomings.
TEST YOUR IDEA  
Writing your business plan acts as a virtual simulation. 
Before you invest your time, energy and money, the 
business plan helps you understand the economic 
environment, envision different financial scenarios, 
identify and locate your markets, sort out the logistics 
of operations and management and much more. It also 
allows you to consider your idea in its entirety and 
adjust your business model for needs or opportunities. 
By writing a business plan, you reduce your risk and 
increase your chances for success!
MANAGE YOUR BUSINESS
AFTER LAUNCH   
Your written business plan is also a management tool. 
It provides benchmarks and milestones to help you 
measure your success. It communicates business 
goals and priorities to your team and keeps everyone 
heading in the same direction.
Almost every entrepreneur needs help putting a 
business plan together, and that’s where your Michigan 
SBDC Consultant becomes your personal, confidential 
partner! Well-written brochures and books are also 
available at libraries and bookstores for guidance. Many 
large accounting firms have manuals available. Various 
legal and financial consultants can be found online 
along with reviews of their services.
Write Your Business Plan
Michigan SBDC Consultants have templates that 
can help with writing your business plan. To request 
business consulting and see a schedule of Michigan 
SBDC workshops and seminars about business 
planning, visit:
michigansbdc.org
In another chapter, we have provided a comprehensive outline 
of a standard business plan you can use to develop a draft 
that you can work from as you move closer to starting your 
own business!
STEP 7:
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
24       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
STEP 4: Complete the Startup Checklist
The following tasks are related to forming and finalizing your business structure and legal entity. You 
may have accomplished a few of these tasks already, and these tasks may be completed at any time in 
the startup process. However, we recommend first determining if there is a market opportunity for your 
business before moving forward.
By investing in research and planning early in the process, you can avoid losing money and suffering 
through the complicated process of having to undo establishing and registering an entity, filing for 
an EIN (Employer Identification Number), and other registrations. Once you have completed your 
research and business plan, you can begin handling some of the logistics of starting your business.
If Needed, Purchase an Existing Business
If you are considering purchasing a business, it is important to understand what you are getting into 
before purchasing the business. You should require detailed information from the seller regarding 
business operations and finances. As the purchaser of even a portion of a business, you may be 
responsible for the previous owner’s liabilities regardless of any contractual language to the contrary. 
Make sure the seller provides proof that there are no existing or hidden liabilities. Before signing 
anything or establishing a closing date, make sure you have reviewed the seller’s tax clearance 
information. In order to receive this documentation, the seller needs to complete Form 5156: Request 
for Tax Clearance Application from the Michigan Department of Treasury. You can point them to the 
online resource available at michigan.gov/taxclearance . For further questions, you may contact the 
Michigan Department of Treasury, Tax Clearance Section, at (517) 636-5260.
Develop Your Business’ Image and Branding
A critical aspect of establishing and growing a business is your brand. Your branding will help you 
attract customers and communicate the character of your business. Plan it carefully and consider 
its staying power. Much of the value of a business accrues from the recognition of its brand and the 
reputation you achieve.
Name and Legal Structure
Selecting a name for your business and deciding on legal structure both need to be carefully 
considered. It is important to choose a name that is not already being used by another business, and 
there are many different forms of legal entities (which are not the same as a license to do business). 
Selection of your legal structure depends on the type of business, potential risks, liabilities, income 
taxes, investment needs, and other considerations. 
The decision about which legal structure to select may be very complicated. It is recommended that 
you consult an attorney and/or tax professional before deciding which structure is best for you.
STEP 8:
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       25
Licensing
Not every business is required to be licensed by the State of Michigan. Licenses are required for certain activities that 
may be conducted in the course of doing business. Local governments may also require certain business licenses. To 
find out if your business will require a state license or permit, visit michigan.gov/statelicensesearch.  Keep in mind that 
legal entity registration is not a license.
Food Business Licensing
Food establishments are governed by the Michigan Food Law and the Michigan Modified FDA Food Code. Licenses 
are required for different categories of Michigan food service businesses. Examples include temporary, fixed, 
mobile, vending machine, seasonal, and special transitory. Food service establishments are licensed via local health 
departments that are empowered to set their own fees. For most questions related to licenses, contact your local 
health department. Make sure to contact the health department about licensing before making large capital purchases 
or starting on any construction activites.
If you are thinking of starting off smaller, the Cottage Food Law allows individuals to make and store certain types of 
foods for sale in an unlicensed home kitchen. Specific rules and limitations apply to making, storing and selling foods 
under Cottage Law. A special checklist for starting a cottage food business can be viewed at:
michigan.gov/documents/mda/A._Cottage_Foods_Checklist_353382_7.pdf
For more detailed information about food business requirements and licensing, visit the Michigan Department of 
Agriculture and Rural Development website at:
michigan.gov/mdard
State and Federal Tax Registration
For more information on how to access services for doing business in the Michigan, visit:
michiganbusiness.org/services/business-assistance
Employer Identification Number (EIN) and Taxpayer Identification Number
An EIN identifies a business for federal and state tax purposes. Generally, an EIN is required by the IRS if the business 
will have employees and/or the business operates as a corporation or partnership.
Zoning and Local Requirements
Startups and expanding businesses need to make sure that the location of their space complies with all local laws 
and regulations. Although Michigan does not have a generic business license, check with your local governments 
(cities, townships, villages, etc.). They may require businesses to be licensed. Unforeseen costs could arise for items 
like change-of-use permits and architectural drawings, so make sure to check with your local municipality before you 
launch your business!
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
26       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Employee Considerations
If employees are hired, business owners have additional responsibilities at both the state and 
federal government levels. For more information, please reach out to your Business Consultant.
Intellectual Property (IP): Patents, Trademarks, Service Marks, Copyrights, etc. 
A patent is a grant of an enforceable property right to the inventor, issued by the United States 
Patent and Trademark Office. A trademark is a word, phrase, symbol, device or any combination 
used to represent a company or product. A service mark is similar to a trademark and is used to 
identify and distinguish between services sold or advertised by a business from similar services of 
others. A copyright enables its owner to exclude others from reproducing certain kinds of works. 
For more information, please get in contact with your Business Consultant.
Business Insurance
Contact an insurance agent to determine the types of insurance your business should purchase. 
And make sure to shop around. Insurance rates and types of coverage vary greatly across 
insurance carriers.
Secure Financing for Your Business
If traditional lending is your financing path, begin visits to lenders as soon as the business plan is 
completed and before a site lease or purchase agreement is signed. Your Michigan SBDC Consultant 
can provide information about lenders in your area.
STEP 9:
CHAPTER 1   —  STARTING A BUSINESS
Start Your Business
Congratulations! Your planning, persistence and determination have paid off. Now the journey and real 
hard work of running a business begins.
If you’re starting a company that has a B2B sales component, another valuable resource is the Michigan 
Economic Development Corporation’s (MEDC’s) Pure Michigan Business Connect (PMBC). PMBC is a 
free service that connects Michigan goods and service suppliers with all levels of corporate purchasers. 
To find out more about how PMBC can help you forge partnerships and grow your business, connect 
with PMBC or sign up for one of their matchmaking events at:
STEP 10:
michiganbusiness.org/services/pure-michigan-business-connect
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       27
GETTING STARTED    PERSONAL ASSESSMENT
2
BUSINESS 
PLAN OUTLINE
28       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Michigan SBDC Business 
Plan Outline
A business plan should tell a compelling story as it communicates information about your business, 
your goals, the market, and more. As you write your business plan, find ways to make each section more 
interesting to readers, especially if the plan will be used to acquire funding.
Drafting your major sections first will help you organize your overall plan. Create a cover sheet and table 
of contents only after you have your major sections drafted. Every business plan should include the 
following major sections.
Company Introduction and Description
Introduce and describe your company. Answer questions like:
  How and why was your company formed? 
  How long has your company been in operation? 
  Where is the company located? 
  What is its legal entity?
You may want to highlight the following elements within this section as well:
  Overview of company capabilities
  Location and hours of operation
  Product or service description
  Present state of development (if applicable)
  Mission, vision and values
  Intellectual property status of patents, copyrights, etc. (if applicable)
  Brief overview of commercialization strategies (if applicable)
  SWOT analysis (your strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats)
Market Analysis
Your market analysis should include a wide variety of information that pulls together all the research you 
did in earlier planning stages. You might consider breaking up your market analysis into several large 
sections, such as the following:
Industry
Paint a picture of what is happening in your industry and explain how you can plan to take advantage of 
opportunities within the industry. Use your understanding of the industry to demonstrate how your sales 
projections are realistic. Explain how fast your industry is growing with sales, numbers of customers 
and profits. Discuss if any segments are growing faster than others and how you might leverage that 
information.
Section 1: 
Section 2: 
CHAPTER 2   —  MICHIGAN SBDC BUSINESS PLAN OUTLINE
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       29
You may want to highlight the following elements within this section:
  Current industry size, status and trends (to show how you will position your company for market opportunities and to identify 
    areas of growth or decline) 
  New products or services in the industry, especially ones that will affect your business directly or indirectly
  Trade associations that support your product or service and that you will be contributing to
  Opportunities and threats affecting the industry (how you will capitalize on the opportunities as well as handle the threats)
Market
Provide a good description of your market. Then, group them into primary and secondary markets. Your primary market is the 
group of customers who are most likely to buy your products or services often or at a high volume. Your secondary market 
includes customers who are likely to buy but not at the same volume or frequency. These two groups comprise your target 
markets.
When identifying your primary and secondary markets, try and describe them in terms of their attributes, demographics, and 
buying behavior. Also, describe what problems your product or service is solving for them and why your selling approach will 
appeal to them.
Next, estimate how large your target markets are, both in number of potential customers and how much those customers are 
likely to spend in a given year. You may also want to estimate how fast your target markets will grow. But be realistic. Even if 
every customer loves your product or service, they all have limits on their ability to spend.
Customers
Describe your ideal customer in terms of their attributes and demographics and describe how your selling approach will make 
sense to each of them.
You may want to highlight the following elements within this section:
  Description of your ideal customer and their attributes
  Geographic areas and limitations of your target customers
Competition
Describe the competitive landscape of your business. Discuss direct competitors who provide the same products or services 
and indirect competitors who provide similar or alternative products or services. Answer questions such as:
  How much of the market do your competitors hold?
  Who has the largest share of the market, and what are their strengths and weaknesses? 
  What gives you a competitive advantage?
You may want to highlight the following elements within this section:
  Analysis of individual competitors: what each one does, how they do it, their strengths and weaknesses, how you might 
    differentiate from them, etc.
  Market share held by competitors and their annual sales volume
  The problem(s) that your company is solving for each of your customer segments
  Customer buying behavior: how often, how much, etc.
  Customer’s decision-making process: how much lead time, who is involved, if it’s a group decision, etc.
CHAPTER 2   —  MICHIGAN SBDC BUSINESS PLAN OUTLINE
30       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Marketing and Sales Plan
Your marketing and sales plan should focus on how you will reach your customers based on their 
characteristics, demographics, purchasing behavior and attitudes about your product or service. It should 
answer this fundamental question: How will you get customers to buy from you and not 
a competitor?
You will want to start by establishing realistic sales goals based on the information you have already provided: 
the size of your industry, the size of your target market, how strong your competitors may be, and your ability 
to deliver your product or service. 
Once you have outlined sales goals, you will want to help readers understand how you will achieve them 
with sales force and distribution plans. Will you implement a direct sales approach? Will customers feel 
comfortable ordering from you online? Will you be offering demonstrations or trials of your product or service 
to customers? How many (and what types) of contact will customers need before agreeing to a purchase?
In tandem with sales, you will also want to outline your communications strategy for reaching enough 
potential customers to reach your sales goals. Once potential customers have a need for your product or 
service, they will follow some version of the buyer’s journey before they make a purchase from you. That 
journey involves three major phases:
By focusing your marketing efforts in areas that will resonate most with your ideal customers, you will 
save time, effort and money while also maximizing your return on marketing investment.
Customers need to be aware of your company before they make any progress 
toward purchasing from you. In your communications plan, be sure to incorporate 
the marketing channels and platforms that your ideal customers use to make 
purchasing decisions. Examples include:
  Search engines like Google and Bing
  Your website
  Online advertisements
  Billboards
  Social media sites
  Direct mail
  Events
  Radio
  Podcasts
  Print ads in magazines, trade journals, etc.
  Email
  Text messaging
Phase 1: 
Awareness
CHAPTER 2   —  MICHIGAN SBDC BUSINESS PLAN OUTLINE
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       31
Once customers are aware of your business, they will consider it along with your 
competitors before they make a purchase. Your communications strategy should outline 
the important talking points you want to use throughout your marketing and advertising 
materials to distinguish you from competitors. Often, this involves carefully considering 
your brand: what is the look and feel you want people to experience when they encounter 
your business? To capture more potential customers during the consideration stage, you 
need to know what matters most to them and address how your business can fulfill their 
need.
Common differentiation points for a business include:
  Price
  Quality
  Customer experience
  Social proof (online reviews, testimonials, etc.)
  Approach (eco-friendly, locally owned, etc.)
  Values (charitable giving, volunteering in the community, etc.)
Once a customer has narrowed their list down to the businesses they are willing to 
purchase from, they will likely contact you by adding items to their online cart, stopping 
in your business, requesting a quote, etc. Their customer experience in this last phase of 
the buyer’s journey will determine which business they ultimately decide to buy from.
As you create a marketing plan, consider how you can develop messages that will reach 
potential customers in each of these three phases of the buyer’s journey.
You will also want to create a regular schedule for getting the word out about your 
business that includes regular communications throughout the year. Within the marketing 
and sales plan section of your business plan, you may also want to discuss:
  Marketing and sales objectives
  What your customers are looking for or need at different stages in the buyer’s journey
  How your sales team can target and follow up with customers at each stage of the 
    buyer’s journey
  Your pricing model and how it may affect sales
  A detailed sales plan that includes methods, procedures, expectations for salespeople,
   distribution channels, customer service policies, warranties, etc.
  A detailed marketing and advertising plan that includes an in-depth calendar and 
   budget for year one as well as a broad outline with budgets and strategy for years two 
   through five
Phase 2: 
Consideration
Phase 3: 
Purchasing 
Decision
CHAPTER 2   —  MICHIGAN SBDC BUSINESS PLAN OUTLINE
32       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Management and Operations  
The management and operations section needs to focus on how the business will be run. Even the best 
and brightest entrepreneurs cannot do everything. As you work on creating an operations strategy, you 
will want to focus on how you will achieve these goals:
  Ensuring customer satisfaction
  Clearly outlining the roles and responsibilities of staff members
  Determining when — and how — your company will grow as demand for your product or
    service increases
In order to accomplish these goals, you will need to consider both high-level ideas and specific 
details. You’ll need to decide what departments you will have, the specific responsibilities for people 
within those departments, and how you will measure the effectiveness of people at fulfilling their 
responsibilities. Any documentation that you create related to organization structure, job descriptions, 
processes, expectations, etc. will help you consistently provide quality in production, sales, delivery
and customer care.
Included within your overall management and operations plan, You will need to address the following key 
areas within your overall management and operations plan:
Human Resources
You should discuss your team in this section. Discuss your core management team and the experience 
and skills each member brings to the business. In addition, explain any skills gaps that may require new 
hires or outside help. Describe areas where you will need to incorporate specialized assistance.
Some common examples include:
  Financial and tax management help from an accountant or bookkeeper
  Legal advice from an attorney
  Risk and compliance management assistance from an insurance agent
  Site and facilities purchasing help from a realtor or local economic development organization
  Marketing and advertising support from an agency or consultant(s)
  Human resources assistance from a staffing service or consultant
  Technology/computer systems installation and support from an IT company or consultant
You will also want to cover other information in your human resources section, such as:
  How many staff members will you hire and in which roles?
  Will you be utilizing full-time, part-time and/or contract employees, and what will the associated 
    costs be?
  How will new employees be trained?
  What are your team’s greatest strengths, and what skill areas and team members need to be added?
  An organization chart that includes departments such as operations, sales, and finance (at a minimum)
  Job duties and work schedules for all team members
  The board of directors or advisory board (if applicable)
Section 3: 
CHAPTER 2   —  MICHIGAN SBDC BUSINESS PLAN OUTLINE
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       33
Operations
If human resources covers who will be doing the work at your business, operations covers the how it will get done. 
You will need to carefully consider what crucial processes need to be in place in order to run your business as 
efficiently as possible. This includes everything from how important decisions are made at your company down to 
how you will keep customers satisfied after they have purchased your product or service.
Within the operations section, you’ll want to focus on answering questions like:
  How will you know when you need new team members?
  What will your interview, hiring and onboarding processes look like when you need new team members?
  How will new employees be trained?
  How will work be processed within your organization? For example, how will you manage new orders  
    from purchase to completion?
  What quality control measures will you put in place?
  How will subcontractors fit into your processes and workflows?
  How will you manage your customers’ data?
  How will you process returns or order changes?
  What project management tools will you need to ensure that everyone on the team is accountable for  
    their responsibilities?
  How will you handle performance reviews, and how often will you conduct them?
Growth and Development
While you may be excited to hit the ground running with your current idea, you should also have broad plans for your 
company’s future and growth. Whether you will be developing new products, branching into additional locations or 
expanding your targeting to new types of customers, a growth plan is important to help set your vision for the future 
and help you make decisions now that will help you achieve it.
As you write this section of your business plan, you’ll want to cover topics like:
  What are your goals and plans for growth and expansion?
  What obstacles do you foresee while trying to achieve your objectives?
  What finance objectives will you need to reach in order to push beyond your current operations?
  Will you need additional financing to grow?
  What important milestones will you need to work toward and monitor in order to avoid difficulties and risks  
    associated with growing your business?
Some businesses are focused on transitioning an idea or invention from conception to the marketplace. For these 
businesses, you will want to include a commercialization strategy that outlines the current status of the new product 
or services as well as the timeline for making it marketable and purchase-able. 
CHAPTER 2   —  MICHIGAN SBDC BUSINESS PLAN OUTLINE
34       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Financials 
In this section, you will want to identify the financial goals and projections for your company. You will 
need to outline the funds you need and how you will obtain them. Start by providing your estimated 
monthly costs, both fixed and variable. After this, you can logically work backwards to show how many 
products you need to sell or how many hours of service you need to complete in order to break even or 
turn a profit at different levels.
The financials section of your business plan will need to be detailed, technical and accurate. You 
should include the following key elements in order to effectively communicate your financial needs and 
projections to investors, partners and others:
Section 4: 
Startup Costs
Detail and itemize all the costs associated with launching  
your business
Monthly Costs
Detail and itemize all the costs associated with operating your 
business on a monthly basis
Sales Estimates
Detail and itemize the expected monthly sales of your product or 
service and how much revenue those sales will bring in
Break-Even Analysis
A break-even analysis can help you identify what sales goals your 
company needs to meet in order to make a profit. To perform a 
break-even analysis, you’ll need to determine your:
  Fixed costs per month: All costs like rent and payroll that  
   don’t change much from month to month
  Variable costs per unit: All costs like inventory, shipping and  
   sales commissions that go up or down with your sales volume,    
   calculated on a per-unit basis 
  Average price per unit: The price a customer will pay for one  
   unit of your product or service
Once you have these three pieces of information, you can use them 
to calculate your monthly break-even quantity (BEQ), which is the 
number of units you need to sell each month to cover your costs.
To calculate your BEQ, use the following formula:  
BEQ = FC / (AP – VC) 
(FC = fixed costs per month, AP = average price per unit,  
VC = variable costs per unit)  
Any amount of monthly sales above your BEQ should turn into 
profits. However, when your monthly sales dip below the BEQ, you’ll 
lose money.
Monthly Cash Flow Projections for 3–5 Years
Compare the estimated money coming into your business through 
sales to the estimated costs of operating your business in order 
to demonstrate your profitability. Your local Michigan SBDC 
Consultant can provide templates to help you accomplish this.
Financial Assumptions
This section describes the methods you used to estimate revenue 
and expenses in your cash flow projections. It’s important to 
describe your financial assumptions logically and make sure they’re 
realistic.
Profit and Loss (P&L) Statements (If Applicable)
P&L statements are more detailed and comprehensive than cash 
flow projections. A P&L statement will break your costs down into 
different categories, such as sales, operating expenses, etc. This 
can then be used to determine if your business is reaching its 
financial goals. If you have been operating your business in some 
way in the past, P&L statements can help demonstrate business 
potential and profitability. If you have not been operating your 
business yet, you will benefit from building a template for your P&L 
statements that can be used to assess your financials each year, 
quarter, or even month.
CHAPTER 2   —  MICHIGAN SBDC BUSINESS PLAN OUTLINE
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       35
Appendices
Throughout your business plan, you may want to refer to supporting documentation that doesn’t fit neatly 
into any section or that would detract from the forward momentum of your plan’s structure. In those 
areas, you may want to leave a brief note in parentheses: (see Appendix A). In your appendices at the 
end of your business plan, you can then include supporting documentation such as:
  Resumes or biographies of individuals mentioned
  A list of owners
  Personal income tax forms (if applicable)
  Letters of recommendation
  Existing purchase orders
  Market research studies or results
  Site floor plans
  Existing or pending contracts
  Any other relevant supporting document
Section 5: 
Prior Financing (If Applicable)
If you have prior personal or commercial financing that will impact your business, you will want to provide detailed information 
about any existing debt, equity and other financial arrangements.
Financial Need
Based on the numbers presented in earlier sections, you will want to outline exactly what finances are needed in order to 
launch or expand your business. Along with that, you will want to explain how you intend to obtain those finances. How 
much of it will be covered by your personal contributions? How much will come from investors, and how will investors be 
compensated for their investment? How much will come from loans or other financing options, and what will the terms and 
conditions be?
Exit Strategy
In this section, you will want to answer questions about how money will be extracted from the business. How will profits be 
used? Do you plan to sell the business? Will it be inherited (and by whom)?
CHAPTER 2   —  MICHIGAN SBDC BUSINESS PLAN OUTLINE
36       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
CHAPTER 2   —  MICHIGAN SBDC BUSINESS PLAN OUTLINE
Final Touches 
In this section, you will want to identify the financial goals and projections for your company. You will need to outline the funds 
you need and how you will obtain them. Start by providing your estimated monthly costs, both fixed and variable. Then you can 
logically work backwards to show how many products you need to sell or how many hours of service you need to complete in 
order to break even or turn a profit at different levels.
The financials section of your business plan will need to be detailed, technical and accurate. In order to effectively 
communicate your financial needs and projections to investors, partners and others, you should include the following key 
elements:
Cover Page
The front page of your business plan should include all of following information:
  Business name
  Business logo (if available)
  Business address
  City, state and zip code
  Website (if available)
Executive Summary
Immediately after the cover page, you will want to include a one or two page executive summary. The executive summary 
section provides a high-level overview of the business plan. It will highlight the primary ideas from each of the business plan 
components, and it should explain the primary purpose for writing the plan; for example, “to obtain financing.”
The order in which you present highlights depends on the audience who will be reading it. For example, if investors will be 
reading the plan, you might want to lead with strong financial highlights to make a more compelling case for obtaining their 
financial support.
 
Table of Contents
Your table of contents should exactly follow the sections you include in your plan and have accurate page numbers so that 
readers can easily navigate your document. Below is an outline based on all the information presented in this chapter.
  Business owner’s name
  Business or owner’s email address
  Business or owner’s phone number
  Business or owner’s fax number
  Date
  Executive Summary
  Company Introduction
  Market Analysis
   • Industry
   • Market
   • Customers
   • Competition
   • Marketing and Sales Plan
  Management and Operations
   • Human Resources
   • Operations
   • Growth and Development
  Financials
   • Startup Costs
   • Monthly Costs
   • Sales Estimates
   • Cashflow Projections
   • Financial Assumptions
   • Profit and Loss Statements
   • Prior Financing
   • Financial Need
   • Exit Strategy
  Appendices
Don’t forget that your local Michigan 
SBDC Consultant can help you with your 
business plan at no cost! Michigan SBDC 
also maintains an on-demand library of 
webinars that’s curated specifically for busy 
entrepreneurs looking to start or grow their 
businesses. To access our online webinar 
library, register online at:
clients.sbdcmichigan.org/workshop.
aspx?ekey=1380109
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       37
CHAPTER 2   —  MICHIGAN SBDC BUSINESS PLAN OUTLINE
business and legal issues cover page
3
BUSINESS 
LEGAL ISSUES
38       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Business Legal Issues
Attending to Legal Issues Is Crucial for Planning  
and Operating Your Business
Your business will face a wide variety of legal issues. They will range from selecting the correct type 
of business entity, complying with state and federal laws and regulations and performing accurate tax 
withholdings. Periodically, you should ask yourself the following questions:
  Does my business’ structure allow it to operate efficiently and profitably while sufficiently protecting its  
    owners and investors from liability?
  Do I have the necessary permits and licenses?
  Am I compliant with state and federal business regulations?
  Am I protecting my business’ intellectual property?
  Do I have the appropriate insurance coverage?
  Am I following Michigan and federal employment laws?
While this guide provides basic information about Michigan and federal business laws, you should not 
consider it legal advice. If you have specific questions about your business’ legal compliance, consult 
an experienced attorney. You may also want to consult a certified public accountant (CPA). A CPA 
can assist with choosing a legal structure for your business, advise you about financial strategies for 
entrepreneurs, and help make sure you don’t run into trouble with the IRS.
Choosing and Filing a Legal Structure for Your Business 
You can choose between creating a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation or LLC. Before you 
choose a legal structure, you should consider the type of business you run and your relationship with 
investors, partners, and other key members of your team. The major factors to consider in choosing a 
legal entity include: 
 
  Your business’ potential risks and liabilities
  Income taxes and investment needs 
  The formalities and expenses associated with each business structure 
 
Choosing a legal structure can be very complicated, and we strongly recommended that you consult 
with a business attorney and tax professional before you register your business. In the following 
sections, we will discuss the different types of legal entities so you can be informed and make the most 
of your time with an attorney, a tax professional or your management team.
CHAPTER 3   —  BUSINESS LEGAL ISSUES
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       39
Sole Proprietorship or Sole Proprietor DBA
A sole proprietorship is a business structure with one owner. Because they’re relatively easy to set up and 
maintain, most small businesses are sole proprietorships. If you do not formally choose a legal structure, 
your business will default to a sole proprietorship because there is no paperwork to file other than 
additional schedules on your personal income tax returns. 
 
However, if you plan to operate your sole proprietorship under a name that is not your personal name, then 
you must file for an assumed name DBA (“doing business as”) certificate with the county clerk in the county 
where your business is located. It’s important to note that a DBA certificate only applies for doing business 
in the county where you registered and does not cover the entire state.
 
There is no legal separation between the business and the owner in a sole proprietorship. This means 
that you will have all responsibility for the liabilities and debts of the business. For instance, if the business 
cannot pay money owed to a vendor, that vendor may sue you individually. It also means that any income or 
losses of the business are accounted for on your personal tax return.
4 Easy and inexpensive to establish
4 Profits are taxed once at the 
     owner’s income tax rate
4 Owner has unlimited personal 
liability for the business’ debts
4 Ownership is limited to one person
Advantages Disadvantages
Partnerships
Two types of partnerships exist: general partnerships and limited partnerships. A general partnership is 
similar to a sole proprietorship except that it has two or more owners. Like a sole proprietorship, it is easy 
to set up and maintain. You do not have to register a general partnership with the state unless you operate 
under a business name other than that of your partners. In that case, you only need to file a DBA certificate 
with the county where the business is located.
 
A limited partnership has one or more general partners and one or more limited partners. The general 
partners control and operate the business and are 100% liable for the business’ debts. The limited partners 
do not participate in the day-to-day operation of the business, and their personal liability is limited to their 
contribution to or investment in the partnership. 
CHAPTER 3   —  BUSINESS LEGAL ISSUES
40       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
To form a limited partnership in Michigan, you must file a certificate of limited partnership with the Michigan 
Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs (LARA). If a limited partnership does not follow statutory 
requirements, it will be treated as a general partnership, so you should consult with an attorney before creating a 
limited partnership: 
We also highly recommended that all partners work together to create a partnership agreement or operating 
agreement that addresses roles, responsibilities and contingencies in order to avoid disagreement and conflict 
between the partners. You will need to produce this agreement for lenders when seeking financing. In a general 
partnership, the owners have unlimited liability for the debts of the business. This means that even though the 
partners share the profits, each partner is 100% responsible for any debts of the business. 
4 General partnerships are easy and  
    inexpensive to establish
4 Each partner’s share of the profits is  
    only taxed once
4 Allows for ownership by more than  
    one individual
4 General partners have unlimited  
    personal liability for business debts  
4 The partnership is legally 
    responsible for the business acts of 
    each partner 
4 A general partner’s interest in the  
     business can only be sold or  
     transferred by consent of all partners
Advantages Disadvantages
Corporations 
A corporation is a separate legal entity with its own rights, privileges, and liabilities separate from its owners. 
Its owners, sometimes called shareholders, are not personally responsible for the debts of the business unless 
they personally guarantee those debts. A corporation usually has more than one shareholder, but it can be 100% 
owned by one person. A corporation’s governance structure has three layers: 
  Shareholders who elect a board of directors
  The Board of Directors who oversee major policies and decisions for the company
    and hire officers
  Officers who run the company on a day-to-day basis
The rights and obligations of shareholders are generally set by Michigan law, and the corporation’s bylaws 
establish the rights and obligations of directors and officers. Due to its three-tiered organizational structure 
and legally mandated formalities, a corporation may be more expensive and complex to establish than the other 
business structures.
 
A corporation is created by filing Articles of Incorporation with LARA along with the appropriate fee. The 
corporation must also pay an annual fee with LARA to continue its existence. 
CHAPTER 3   —  BUSINESS LEGAL ISSUES
michigan.gov/lara
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       41
C and Subchapter S Corporations
By default, the IRS characterizes corporations as C corporations. A C corporation (the entity itself) pays 
taxes at special corporate tax rates on the profits it earns and retains. C corporations also distribute 
earnings to shareholders as dividends, and those shareholders pay taxes on this income. Therefore, many 
people say corporate earnings are subject to “double taxation,” once at the corporation level and once at 
the shareholder level. 
However, qualified small corporations and LLCs can ask the IRS to treat them as a subchapter S 
corporation. Subchapter S entities do not pay taxes on the earnings of the business; instead, the income 
passes through to individual shareholders or members and gets reported on their personal income tax 
returns. This eliminates the corporate “double taxation” of C corporations.
To be eligible for subchapter S status, businesses must meet a series of requirements, including having 
100 or fewer shareholders or members.
4 Easier to raise capital through sale  
    of stock
4 Limited liability for business debts –  
    shareholders only risk their
    investment
4 Easy to transfer ownership
4 Can elect Subchapter S status with 
    the IRS
4 More expensive to set up and  
    maintain than other entity types  
4 Corporate formalities are complex  
    but must be strictly followed to  
    maintain corporate status and 
     limited liability of shareholders
4 Closely regulated by both federal 
     and state government
4 Double taxation if not eligible or 
    fail to elect Subchapter S status 
    with the IRS
Advantages Disadvantages
Limited Liability Company (LLC)
In many ways, a limited liability company (LLC) combines the advantages offered by both partnerships 
and corporations. An LLC’s members, or owners of the business, have limited liability protection like 
shareholders in a corporation, but they also gain the simpler operation and pass-through tax characteristics 
of a partnership.
 
In Michigan, you must file your LLC’s Articles of Organization with LARA along with the appropriate filing 
fee. Like a corporation, an LLC must pay an annual fee with LARA to continue its existence. Business 
owners can file their Articles of Organization online at the LARA website.  
CHAPTER 3   —  BUSINESS LEGAL ISSUES
42       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
In addition to the Articles of Organization, an LLC’s members should create and enter an operating 
agreement. This document establishes consistency and understanding about how the company:
  Makes decisions and structures its management hierarchy
  Assigns duties to members
  Requires contributions from members
  Calculates profits and losses 
  Limits its members’ liability and protects them
  Adds, terminates or changes its membership
Low-Profit Limited Liability Company (L3C) 
A low-profit limited liability company (L3C) is a relatively new business entity and can be formed as a new 
entity or by converting an existing one. Michigan is one of a few states that allow this hybrid entity. An L3C 
is a for-profit company with a charitable mission. Because they have simplified compliance guidelines 
with the IRS’ program-related investment rules, it’s easier for private foundations to invest in these socially 
beneficial businesses.
 
However, the business must significantly further one or more charitable purposes, and the production of 
income and appreciation of property cannot be a significant purpose of the L3C. Similarly, an L3C cannot 
pursue any political or legislative purposes. You create an L3C by filing Articles of Organization with LARA 
along with the appropriate filing fee. You must also include the words “low-profit limited liability company” 
or the abbreviation “L.3.C.” or “l.3.c.” in the name of the new entity (Article I of the form) and cross or white 
out the “all-purpose” clause in Article II. 
 
Michigan law also requires that the definition of L3C business purpose include specific language, so you 
should consult with an attorney before filing your business as this type of legal entity. If you choose to 
convert an existing entity to an L3C, it is essential to consider the legal and tax implications and consult 
with an attorney.
4 Limited liability for business debts  
    and claims
4 Flexible tax options
4 Easier to establish and maintain than  
    a corporation
4 More complex start-up requirements  
   than partnerships or sole proprietorships
Advantages Disadvantages
CHAPTER 3   —  BUSINESS LEGAL ISSUES
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       43
Like an LLC, Michigan does not require the filing of an operating agreement to form an L3C, but it’s in your 
best interest to draft and execute one. Your operating agreement structures your business’ key policies and 
procedures, including how you will manage it, make decisions, calculate profits and losses, and handle 
changes in membership.
Professional Service Corporation (PC) or  
Professional Limited Liability Company (PLC)
A professional service corporation (PC) is a corporation that practices certain licensed or “learned 
professions,” such as law, medicine or architecture. A professional limited liability company (PLC) is an 
LLC formed for the same purpose. All shareholders or members of a professional entity must be licensed 
professionals. For example, if a law firm is a PC or PLC, all of its shareholders must be licensed attorneys. 
To create a PC, you must file Articles of Incorporation with LARA. A PLC requires Articles of Organization. 
In both cases, the entity must pay a filing fee and annual fees to continue operation. Additionally, the entity 
must provide updated lists of licensed professional equity holders each year. 
4 All the benefits of LLC structure
4 Qualification as Program Related  
     Investment (PRI), facilitating
     foundation investments
4 Not subject to nonprofit regulation
4 Branding and marketing opportunities
4 PRIs are rare and  
    considered risky, with potential  
    excise tax liability to
    the foundation
4 Unresolved questions about 
    how rules and regulations will be 
    interpreted and applied
Advantages Disadvantages
Do You Still Have Questions 
About Creating a Business  
Entity in Michigan?
For more information about filing documents for a limited 
partnership, corporation or limited liability company, 
please call the Department of Licensing and Regulatory 
Affairs, Corporations, Securities and Commercial 
Licensing Bureau at 517-241-6470 or go to:
michigan.gov/corporations
CHAPTER 3   —  BUSINESS LEGAL ISSUES
44       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Selecting and Registering a Business Name  
As you’re choosing your business’ legal structure, you’ll also need to select its name. In Michigan, a business name 
is registered at the time the business legal entity is formed. While you can use your personal name as your business’ 
name, many businesses opt to use a different or assumed name.
 
If you choose an assumed name, you must pick a name that is not already being used by another business, and 
you should run a series of online searches to determine that the name is not already in use or registered. You can 
check business names and registrations at the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (uspto.gov) and the Michigan 
Corporations Name Availability Search:
 
 cofs.lara.state.mi.us/corpweb/CorpSearch/CorpSearch.aspx
 
If your business’ name is integral to its success or you plan to invest significant money in marketing materials, you 
should also consult with an intellectual property attorney before choosing and registering your name. 
 
How you select and register your business name will depend on your business’ structure, which is why it is important 
to consider these two facets of your business at the same time. Keep in mind the following facts:
  A sole proprietorship or partnership using the names of the owners does not have to register their business name 
  If the sole proprietorship or partnership is assuming a different name, they must file a DBA (doing business as)  
   certificate with the county clerk of the county where the business is located
  Corporations and PCs register a name when filing Articles of Incorporation
  LLCs, L3Cs and PLCs register a name when filing Articles of Organization.
Again, we recommend that you conduct a thorough entity search before filing your paperwork.
 
A business may choose to operate under a name different from the official name, or it may choose to operate 
multiple businesses through one legal entity. For corporations or LLCs, this form of DBA is not the same as one filed 
with the county. A corporation, PC, LLC, PLC, or L3C must file a Certificate of Assumed Name for each name used 
by the business, which can be done through the Corporations Division of the LARA website at:
michigan.gov/corporations
Remember, just because the State of Michigan allows you to register your business name, it does not 
mean you have absolute rights and ownership of that name. If you have any questions or concerns 
about choosing a name for your business, you should consult an attorney.
CHAPTER 3   —  BUSINESS LEGAL ISSUES
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       45
Patents
The United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) 
issues patents for inventions, which grant property rights to 
the inventor. Generally, the right conferred by the patent grant 
is “the right to exclude others from making, using, offering for 
sale or selling” the invention in the United States or importing 
the invention into the United States for a period of time, 
typically 20 years. 
 
Obtaining a patent is a complicated and highly technical 
process. If you have questions about the patent application 
process, you should strongly consider speaking with a patent 
attorney. You can also visit the U.S. Patent and Trademark 
Office’s website at: 
uspto.gov
Trademarks
A trademark is a word, phrase, symbol, design or combination 
of words, phrases, symbols or designs that identifies and 
distinguishes one party’s goods from those of others. A 
service mark is the same as a trademark, except that it 
identifies and distinguishes the source of a service rather 
than a product. 
 
You don’t need to register all marks, but registration has 
certain advantages. Registration notifies the public of your 
claim of ownership and establishes a legal presumption that 
you have the exclusive right to use the registered mark. There 
are several different ways to designate a trade or service 
mark. 
TM provides notice of a claim of rights to an unregistered 
trademark but does not guarantee protection under  
trademark laws. 
SM functions similarly to the TM symbol; it covers an 
unregistered service mark but does not guarantee protection 
under trademark laws.
The ® symbol should be used only in connection with  
registered marks.
 
Registration of a mark used in Michigan gives the owner 
of the mark certain limited legal protections. Use of ® with 
any unregistered trademark could result in fraud claims or 
other problems enforcing trademark rights. Contact the 
Department of Energy, Labor & Economic Growth, Bureau of 
Commercial Services, Corporation Division at 517-241-6470 
if you have questions or concerns about a registered mark.
 
For use throughout the United States, you can register 
trademarks and service marks with the United States Patent 
and Trademark Office (USPTO). Call 800-786-9199 or visit 
the USPTO online at:
There are fees associated with the state and federal 
trademark registration processes.
Copyrights 
A copyright gives its owner property rights and prevents 
others from reproducing certain works, such as books, 
musical compositions, technical drawings or computer 
programs. Copyright notice is the symbol © or “Copyright,” 
followed by the year of the work’s first publication and the 
name of the copyright holder. 
 
The copyright notice for sound recordings of musical or 
other audio works is a sound recording copyright symbol . 
Similarly, the phrase “All rights reserved” may also be used to 
assert copyright. 
 
You may register a copyright by filing an application with the 
Library of Congress. Call toll free at 877-476-0778  or visit:
copyright.gov
Protecting Your Business’ Intellectual Property 
In addition to protecting yourself from financial issues by choosing an appropriate business structure, you will want to protect 
the products and services you provide. Your business’ intellectual property is incredibly valuable, but many business owners 
don’t understand patents, trademarks, service marks and copyrights.
CHAPTER 3   —  BUSINESS LEGAL ISSUES
uspto.gov
46       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Environmental Considerations
When a business’ activities impact the environment or generate air emissions and solid or liquid waste, a business may 
need permits, licenses or other authorizations from the Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes and Energy 
(EGLE), which was formerly called the Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ). 
 
For more information and specific program contacts at EGLE, visit their website at: michigan.gov/egle
EGLE regulates business activities involving:
  The release of air emissions 
  Solid waste disposal and processing 
  Storage, hauling and disposal of hazardous waste
  Major alterations to the landscape 
  Building near waterways or wetlands 
 
The Department of Natural Resources also has some permitting and licensing programs related to the use of use and 
sale of environmental resources. You can learn more from their Customer Services Guide:
michigan.gov/documents/dnr/DNR_customer_service_guide_407568_7.pdf
Licenses, Permits and Business Regulations  
Depending on the type of business, you may need a specific certification, 
license or permit to operate, but there is no generic Michigan business 
license. If you’re unsure whether your business will require a license, 
you can access the State License Search site at: michigan.gov/
statelicensesearch .
Local licensing, permits and regulations may differ from the state’s rules. 
You should check with your county, city, village or township clerk to 
determine if any local licenses or registrations are required and to obtain 
the necessary forms.
Navigating Michigan’s Business Regulations  
Small business regulations are becoming increasingly difficult to address an array of issues from consumer protection 
to environmental preservation. While compliance may seem difficult, the good news is that the government offers 
many assistance programs. In the following sections, we’ll discuss some of the most important regulations to 
consider and provide guidance about where to get additional help.
CHAPTER 3   —  BUSINESS LEGAL ISSUES
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       47
Other environmental-focused resources for new and existing businesses are also available from a wide variety of 
sources, such as:    
   
  
The Environmental Assistance Center
You can receive free technical assistance, consultations and guidance by calling 800-662-9278  or visiting:
The Michigan Guide to Environmental, Health and Safety Regulations
This guide is a general and informational reference that provides an overview of regulatory programs that apply to 
many businesses. It is available online at:
The EGLE Permit Information Checklist
This simple checklist can help you determine if your business requires any type of environmental permit, and it is 
available online at:
Baseline Environmental Assessment (BEA)
You should consider the possibility of environmental contamination when looking at the lease or purchase of an 
existing building or property. In Michigan, a Baseline Environmental Assessment allows people to purchase or begin 
operating at a facility without being held liable for existing or previous contamination. To learn more about BEAs, visit 
the EGLE website at:
The EPA’s Brownfields Program
A brownfield is a property that is complicated to expand, redevelop or reuse because of the presence of hazardous 
substances or contaminants. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) operates its Brownfields Program to 
support revitalization of brownfields. The Brownfields Program provides grants to fund environmental assessment, 
cleanup, and job training. To see if funding is available in your area, visit your local economic development offices. You 
can also visit the EPA’s Brownfields Program website to learn more: 
epa.gov/brownfields/overview-epas-brownfields-program
Business owners should also check with county and local authorities about whether they need additional local permits or 
licensing. Even though the costs of adhering to regulations may seem burdensome for a business owner, the cost of non-
compliance, including fines, penalties and even business closure, can be much greater. 
1
2
3
4
5
michigan.gov/egle/0,9429,7-135-3307_36106---,00.html
michigan.gov/egle/0,9429,7-135-3308-15820--,00.html
michigan.gov/documents/deq/deq-oea-cau-permits-eqp3580_415019_7.pdf
michigan.gov/egle/0,9429,7-135-3311_4109_4212---,00.html
CHAPTER 3   —  BUSINESS LEGAL ISSUES
48       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Considerations About Zoning, 
Building Codes and Ordinances  
Another important regulatory area to investigate as you 
start or expand your business is related to zoning, building 
codes and other ordinances. In addition to state regulations, 
startups and expanding businesses must comply with 
local laws and regulations, including zoning and building 
codes. Before you buy or lease a property, contact the city 
assessor and city, township or village clerk about 
applicable rules.
You should also contact a local building inspector about 
codes and regulations before you start any construction 
project. Most communities set strict standards and rules 
related to building, electrical systems, mechanical systems, 
and plumbing as well as construction, alteration, renovation, 
demolition, occupancy, and use of buildings. 
 
A home-based business is subject to the same local 
laws and regulations, so you will need to check with 
your local government to determine if you need any 
special permits. 
For example, certain products cannot be produced in the 
home. Most states outlaw home production of fireworks, 
drugs, poisons, explosives, sanitary or medical products and 
toys. Strict rules also apply to the processing of food and 
drinks, the manufacturing of clothing and other occupations.
 
If your business operates in violation of the local 
government’s laws and regulations, you could face fines or 
closure. For information about city, county, township and/or 
village-level rules, contact your local government agency. 
Accessibility Considerations
Barrier-free design has been part of Michigan’s building 
code since 1966. In 1992, barrier-free design also became 
federal law as part of the Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA). These regulations try to ensure that public 
facilities are accessible to and usable by all citizens. No 
exceptions to the state requirements can be made by a local 
government or a state department, agency or person, except 
the Barrier-Free Design Board. 
A person requesting an exception must demonstrate 
“compelling need,” as defined in section 5a of 1966 Public 
Act (PA)1, MCL 125.1355a. For additional information, visit 
the Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs (LARA), 
Bureau of Construction Codes website at michigan.gov/
bcc. You can also contact the Plan Review Division by 
calling 517-241-9328.
Business Taxes and Withholding  
Understanding your tax obligations and preparing your 
taxes can be confusing and complicated. Federal, state, 
and local revenue agencies may levy penalties if returns 
are neglected. However, we strongly recommend that you 
consult with a professional on all business tax matters, as 
the rules can be complicated and subject to change.
Employer Identification Number 
(EIN) 
An Employer Identification Number (EIN) identifies your 
business for federal and state tax purposes. You must 
obtain an EIN if your business pays wages to one or 
more employee, regardless of whether it is set up as a 
partnership, a corporation for profit or nonprofit, a limited 
liability company, a trust or estate, or a sole proprietorship. 
Sole proprietorships without employees are not required 
to have an EIN and may use the owner’s Social Security 
number for tax purposes, but they may apply for an EIN if 
they are concerned about identity theft.
If you become the new sole owner of an existing business, 
you cannot use the EIN of the previous owner. However, 
an existing business that adds, opens or acquires a new 
operation of a similar type may use its current EIN for both 
the existing and new operations. You must obtain a new EIN 
if the establishment’s line of business is different from your 
existing operations. 
 
You must include your EIN on any return, statement or other 
official financial document if you are an employer. And 
individuals who file Schedule C or I must use an EIN when 
filing excise, employment, alcohol, tobacco or 
firearms returns.
CHAPTER 3   —  BUSINESS LEGAL ISSUES
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       49
Self-Employment Taxes 
Just as employers must withhold taxes and report them 
to various government agencies, so must self-employed 
individuals. You are considered self-employed if you 
operate a trade, business or profession, either by 
yourself or as a partner. 
Personal Income Tax 
As a sole proprietor or partner, the owner pays taxes on the income from the business on a personal income tax return 
with the state and federal governments. To do so, you will need to file an additional schedule that identifies the income and 
expenses of the business. 
Partners file a partnership return in addition to the personal income tax return; the partnership return distributes profits and 
losses between partners according to the partnership agreement. 
Corporations pay taxes on business income at corporate tax rates. Shareholders and employees (including paid corporate 
officers) pay individual income tax on any salary and dividends received from the corporation.
Most businesses are also required to make estimated tax payments every quarter for Michigan income tax, federal income 
tax and self-employment tax. For more information about your tax obligations and the proper forms, contact the Michigan 
Department of Treasury at 517-636-6925; for federal taxes and the IRS, call 800-829-4933  or visit:
If an owner of a corporation provides services 
to the corporation, the owner is an employee 
of the corporation and subject to all payroll 
and employment taxes. 
irs.gov
Keep in mind that many financial institutions will not allow 
you to open a commercial banking account without an EIN.
Applying for an EIN is a free 
service offered by the Internal 
Revenue Service, and you should 
be cautious of websites that 
charge a fee for an EIN. 
Withholding Income and
Other Taxes  
Any employer of one or more persons must withhold federal, 
state and possibly local income taxes from its employees’ 
wages. Employers are also responsible for paying into the 
Social Security and Medicare systems and withholding a 
matched amount from employees’ wages. State and federal 
unemployment insurance payments must be paid entirely 
by the employer and not from an employee’s wages. Those 
obligations may include:
CHAPTER 3   —  BUSINESS LEGAL ISSUES
50       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Sales and Use Taxes 
Anyone who engages in retail sales of tangible personal property (goods that one can possess or exchange) from a 
Michigan location needs a sales tax license. At the time of this guide’s publication, the Michigan sales tax is 6% of retail 
sales receipts and local governments cannot levy sales tax in Michigan. 
 
When out-of-state businesses sell or lease tangible personal property to a Michigan customer, they must register for use 
tax, which is also 6%, currently.
 
To register for sales and use tax, you can enroll online on the Michigan Treasury Online website or by paper registration. 
For more information, you can refer to the Michigan Business Taxes Registration Booklet at: 
Corporate Income Tax 
Since January 1, 2012, the primary business tax in Michigan is the Corporate Income Tax (CIT). It is based on business 
income and applies to a business that is taxed as a C corporation for federal tax purposes. 
 
Taxpayers with less than $350,000 in allocated or apportioned gross receipts are not required to file a Michigan 
business return or tax. However, the gross receipts filing threshold does not apply to insurance companies and financial 
institutions; instead, these taxpaying entities are not required to file or pay if annual liability is less than or equal to $100. 
For more information, please consult with a tax specialist or accountant. 
 
Motor Fuel Taxes 
The state levies motor fuel taxes on highway, marine and aviation fuel. International Field Tax Agreement (IFTA) and 
intrastate motor carriers should contact the Michigan Department of Treasury, Special Taxes Section by calling  
517-636-4600 or by visiting michigan.gov/taxes. For additional information, please refer to the Michigan Public Service 
Commission Motor Carrier Division online at: 
Local Taxes
Local governments in Michigan levy property taxes. Since property tax rates vary by locality, make sure to consult your 
local city, township or village offices for specific information. The local treasurer’s office can provide information about 
other local taxes that may apply along with information about registration and payment requirements. 
CHAPTER 3   —  BUSINESS LEGAL ISSUES
michigan.gov/mpsc
Streamline Your State Taxes with Michigan Treasury Online  
Michigan Treasury Online (MTO) lets registered businesses access, view, and make changes to their information. The 
MTO self-service tool improves taxpayers’ convenience and efficiency when notifying the Michigan Treasury of routine 
account changes. A registered business can access its information and submit changes via MTO rather than sending a 
form. 
 
The MTO self-service tool is easy to access, easy to navigate and available 24/7. You can only access it through the 
Michigan Treasury Online website at:
 mto.treasury.michigan.gov
michigan.gov/taxes
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       51
Business Insurance  
In addition to planning for taxes, you will also want to consider what types of insurance you need for your business. Some insurance 
coverage is required by law, and other coverage simply makes good business sense. To learn more about the coverage that is best for your 
specific business, you can contact an insurance agent who writes business insurance, or “business lines.”
 
You can also check into insurance programs offered by Chambers of Commerce or trade associations related to your type of business. 
Insurance is a very competitive business. Be sure to contact more than one source and shop around to get the best coverage for the 
lowest price. Types of insurance that you will want to investigate include the following:
Liability Insurance 
Your business faces many forms of potential liability. When 
your employees or agents cause someone harm, you may be 
responsible for their damages. There are many types of liability, 
including some related to specific industries, and the law is 
constantly changing. A competent professional should perform an 
analysis of your liability insurance needs to determine the adequate 
and appropriate level of protection for your business. 
 
Property Insurance
Many different types of property insurance and levels of coverage 
are available. Before you buy coverage, make sure you know 
the property’s value and what you’d need to repair or rebuild if 
something were to go wrong. You must also understand the terms 
of the insurance, including any limitations or waivers of coverage.  
Workers’ Compensation Insurance 
Most employers must provide workers’ compensation insurance 
for their employees to cover injuries and occupational diseases 
incurred during the course of their employment. Under Michigan 
law, you must either purchase a workers’ compensation policy 
from a private insurance company or meet strict self-insurance 
requirements. For further information, visit the Michigan Workers’ 
Compensation Agency’s website at michigan.gov/wca.
Business Interruption Insurance 
While property insurance may pay enough to replace damaged or 
destroyed equipment or buildings, how will you pay costs such as 
taxes, utilities, and other continuing expenses during the period 
between when the damage occurs and when the property is 
replaced? Business interruption (or business income) insurance 
can provide funds to help pay your fixed expenses while your 
business is not operational.
At the MTO, you can also register for unemployment taxes and the following Michigan business taxes: 
  Corporate income tax 
  Flow-through withholding 
  International Fuel Tax Agreement (IFTA) 
  Motor fuel 
  Sales 
  Use 
  Withholding 
  Tobacco 
 
MTO also allows businesses to delegate and share access to appropriate staff members or outside representatives. The Michigan Treasury 
Online website is located at mto.treasury.michigan.gov ; you can also call the Michigan Department of Treasury at 517-636-6925.
 
For more information on various Michigan taxes, visit michigan.gov/taxes/0,4676,7-238-43519---,00.html. To download and print a copy of 
the Michigan Business Taxes Registration Booklet, including mail filing forms, go to:   
CHAPTER 3   —  BUSINESS LEGAL ISSUES
michigan.gov/documents/518_3620_7.pdf
52       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Special Considerations for Selling to the Government  
 
Like taxes, insurance, and other regulations, selling to government agencies requires special legal considerations. The 
government buys a lot from small businesses: nearly $400 billion worth of goods and services each year! If you want to make 
the government your customer, there’s a good chance they need what you have to offer.
 
You can diversify and improve the income potential of your business by proactively marketing to secure government contracts 
as well as becoming registered to sell to the government at the local, state, or federal level. Eligibility for government contracts 
usually requires that a business has been operational for at least two years.
 
Procurement Technical Assistance Centers (PTAC) Can Help with 
Government Bidding  
Getting your business registered for bidding on contracts or direct government purchases requires specific procedures. 
The Michigan Economic Development Corporation (MEDC) provides support to a statewide network of PTAC and MEDC 
Procurement Offices that assist businesses with federal, state, and local government contracts. A PTAC can help you:
  Obtain the most current and relevant information available
  Provide insight into the research process
  Coach you through the government contracting process from start to finish
Most services available through the PTACs of Michigan are free of charge. To find the PTAC or MEDC Procurement Office 
nearest to your business, visit:  
Key Person Insurance
If you or any other individual is so critical to the operation 
of your business that it cannot continue in the event of your 
illness or death, you should consider Key Person insurance. 
Banks or government loan programs frequently require this 
type of insurance. It can also be used to provide continuity in 
operations during a period of ownership transition caused by 
death or incapacitation of an owner or other key employees. 
 
Automobile 
A vehicle owned by your business should be insured for 
both liability and replacement purposes. However, you may 
also need special insurance (called non-owned automobile 
coverage) if you use your personal vehicle on company 
business. This policy covers the business for any damage 
that may result from such usage.
Officers and Directors 
Under certain circumstances, officers and directors of a 
corporation may become personally liable for their actions 
on behalf of the company. An officer and director insurance 
policy can help cover this liability. 
 
Home Office 
If you are establishing an office in your home, it is a good 
idea to contact your homeowner’s insurance company to 
update your policy to include coverage for office equipment. 
This coverage is not automatically included in a standard 
homeowner’s policy. 
CHAPTER 3   —  BUSINESS LEGAL ISSUES
ptacsofmichigan.org
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       53
Procurement support includes, but is not limited to: 
  One-on-one counseling 
  Orientation to the procurement system 
  Training seminars and conferences 
  Bid match for government solicitations 
  Government specifications 
  Bid package assistance
  Providing bid history and contract award results
  Linking local companies to federal and state government agencies 
  State of Michigan contracting assistance 
  Assistance after a bid is won
The Michigan Defense Center is the arm within MEDC that strategically connects defense buyers and prime contractors with 
Michigan’s capable supply chain. PTACs and MEDC Procurement Offices are the front line of the Michigan Defense Center. 
With the goal of creating Michigan jobs by bringing more defense contracts to Michigan, the MDC aggressively seeks and 
identifies established Michigan companies to create and compete in supply chains by leveraging their unique abilities to meet 
defense goals.
Becoming a State of Michigan Contractor
The Michigan Department of Technology, Management and Budget (DTMB) competitively bids all solicitations for the state, 
and Michigan businesses are encouraged to participate in the state contracting process. The Michigan DTMB and MEDC 
work closely to provide valuable tools and training for Michigan businesses that want to become state contractors.
 
The Michigan DTMB-Purchasing Operations’ Contract Connect website provides information and educational services to 
businesses looking to contract with the State of Michigan. The Michigan DTMB manages the procurement of commodities, 
services and information technology valued at $25,000 and above for all state agencies. The Contract Connect website also 
provides opportunities in design, construction, and real estate leasing.
At the website, michigan.gov/micontractconnect , you can view the current contract portfolio or DTMB-Purchasing Operations 
Contract List.  Additionally, you can find training materials and upcoming events to help guide you through the state 
contracting process. 
To contact purchasing staff, please email DTMB at: miconntractconnect@michigan.gov . You can also find 
detailed contact information for individual state agencies handling procurements over $25,000 by visiting: 
michigan.gov/micontractconnect
CHAPTER 3   —  BUSINESS LEGAL ISSUES
54       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
CHAPTER 3   —  BUSINESS LEGAL ISSUES
8(a) Certification
Disadvantaged Small Businesses 
Indian-Owned Economic Enterprises
and Organizations
Historically Underutilized Business Zones  
(HUB Zones)
Woman-Owned or Controlled Small Business OR 8(m) 
Woman-Owned Small Business Program
Veteran-Owned and Service-Disabled 
Veteran-Owned Businesses
sba.gov/blogs/sbas-8a-certification-program-explained 
sba.gov/content/native-americans-0
sba.gov/contracting/government-contracting-programs/hubzone
sba.gov/content/veteran-service-disabled-veteran-owned
sba.gov/content/disadvantaged-businesses
sba.gov/content/women-owned-small-business-program 
Small Business Certifications 
 
When the federal government allocates government spending, it establishes set-asides — a percentage of total government 
contract money to be spent that is “set aside” and required to be spent with small businesses that meet certain criteria. The 
certifications are as follows and you can find more information about each at the corresponding URL.
Some certifications are self-certifying, while others require third-party certification. Your PTAC consultant can assist you in 
determining if you would qualify for certification and where and how to complete it. To find your local PTAC, visit the PTACs of 
Michigan website at:
ptacsofmichigan.org
There is a common misunderstanding that small business certifications confer special treatment to certified small businesses. 
While such certifications may have independent marketing and sales value, they primarily apply to small businesses engaged 
in government contracting. Small business certifications generally offer no advantage related to grants or funding.
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       55
CHAPTER 3   —  BUSINESS LEGAL ISSUES
4
FINANCIAL  
MANAGEMENT
56       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Financial Management
and Cybersecurity
The Benefits of Financial Management 
Financial management is the language of business, and you need to pay careful attention to your financial 
management practices from the moment you start your business. The process of proper financial 
management includes bookkeeping, projections, financial statements and financing, which form the 
foundation for reaching your goals and making sound business decisions. Financial management also reveals 
if you are making a profit and helps you decide what you can afford in terms of your store or office location, 
inventory purchases, employees, and equipment. 
 
You need sound financial information for many reasons, like setting your prices and selecting your vendors. 
Financial management also gives you the tools to plan for business growth, diversification of your product 
lines, or reaching new markets. It gives you tools to chart your course into the future, adjust your direction 
when needed, and help you find your way through challenging times. If your business growth requires 
financing, financial management provides the information to know how much you can afford for your 
business. It gives you the documentation needed for a loan application, and it helps you discuss your 
business circumstances with a lender in terms that improve your ability to qualify for the loan.
You should also register your business with the business credit reporting company Dun & Bradstreet (D&B) 
so you can receive a Data Universal Numbering System (DUNS) number and begin establishing a business 
credit history. A DUNS number is like your business’ Social Security number; similar to how you would 
provide your personal Social Security number for a personal credit application or whenever someone wants 
to check your personal credit history, your DUNS number will let a creditor or another business easily view 
your business’ credit report.
To get a DUNS number for your business from Dun & Bradstreet, visit:
dnb.com/duns-number/get-a-duns.html
Establishing a Budget   
Creating a budget is the first place to start with your financial management practices. A budget is a list of all 
your (monthly or yearly) expenses, organized by categories. A budget is a tool that helps you: 
  Track all your business expenses 
  Plan for the future 
  Economize when you need to 
  Plan for expansion 
  Make a profit 
Once you create a budget, you can then use it to compare what you’ve budgeted to your actual expenditures. 
CHAPTER 4   —  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       57
Bookkeeping  
Bookkeeping is the organized process of tracking all income and expense transactions, and it’s a critical 
component of financial management. Good bookkeeping leads to better business decisions regarding financing, 
taxes, owner’s draw and retirement. Here are 10 basic bookkeeping steps which you should begin following 
immediately once you start your business: 
Obtain Business Accounting Software
Proper software selection is critical for success. 
Open Separate Business Bank Accounts
Do not mix business and personal financial 
accounts.
 
Reconcile Your Business Accounts 
Each month, reconcile your accounts using 
business accounting software or a cloud computing 
reconciliation process.
Track Sales 
Create an airtight system for tracking sales using 
tools such as a register tape, invoices and a sales 
book. Always use this sales tracking system. 
Deposit All Sales
Using duplicating deposit slips, deposit all sales 
in your business checking account. Alternately, 
remote deposit capture (RDC) may be available 
for depositing checks. This technology allows you 
to deposit a check into your account from your 
office by sending the bank an electronic image of 
the check. Total sales should equal total deposits. 
Do not spend cash sales. Link all forms of sales 
documentation (such as invoices, cash register 
tapes, and sales books) with a specific deposit.
Write Business Checks or Use a Business 
Check Card for All Business Expenses
Don’t use a petty cash system until you gain 
significant experience at bookkeeping.
Obtain a Separate Business Credit Card
If you plan to use a credit card for business 
expenses, consider obtaining a card in your 
company’s name. Doing so will help you keep track 
of business expenses.
Always Pay Business Expenses First
Many new businesses start as sole proprietorships. 
In sole proprietorships, you, the owner, do not get 
a salary; rather, you take an owner’s draw. But how 
much should you take? Here’s a rule of thumb: 
Sales pay for business expenses first and personal 
expenses last. 
Run a Profit and Loss (P&L) Statement
A checking account balance is not a good indication 
of how much profit the business has made or 
what amount is available for an owner’s draw. A 
P&L statement can provide a better picture of the 
financial health of the organization.
Pay Yourself With an Owner’s Draw 
Owners should pay themselves by writing a check 
or making an electronic transfer from the business 
account to a personal account. If you are a sole 
proprietor, assign those draw checks to an equity 
account called “draws.”
1 6
2
7
3
8
4
9
5
10
CHAPTER 4   —  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
58       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Cash Flow and Cash Flow Projection
Cash flow can be defined in two ways: 
 
  Balance of cash received minus the amount of cash 
    paid out over a period of time
  Moving cash in or out of a business 
 
A cash flow projection is a financial statement that shows 
how cash is expected to flow in and out of a business over 
a period of time. It is used to see if projected cash receipts 
(called “inflows”) will be sufficient to cover projected 
cash disbursements (called “outflows”). Unfortunately, a 
business can be profitable and still run out of cash. A cash 
flow projection can help you manage your cash so you can 
pay your bills in a timely way and keep the doors of your 
business open.  
 
You can also use a cash flow projection to set sales goals, 
plan for related expenses and determine your break-even 
point during a start-up or expansion phase. If you need to 
plan for a large expenditure, such as an equipment purchase 
or moving to a new location, a cash flow projection is the 
perfect tool to help you effectively manage your finances 
during that time. Similarly, if you have a seasonal business 
with large inventory purchases, a projection can help you 
plan to have the cash on hand necessary to make a large 
inventory investment. Unlike a P&L statement, which can 
mask cash shortages, a cash flow projection helps you see 
the cash status of your business now and plan into 
the future. 
 
Financial Recordkeeping 
Accurate and complete financial records are the basis of 
understanding and monitoring the health of your business. 
An accountant or bookkeeper can be indispensable to a 
new or growing business, not only as a financial record 
keeping service but also as a key adviser on issues related 
to taxes, cash flow, payroll, credit, systems management, 
and changes within the tax system. Good financial 
recordkeeping allows you to create reports of current data 
so you can compare your current status to your financial 
goals and business plan.
 
Using your financial records, it is essential to:
  Regularly review and compare your balances
  Evaluate the reasons for differences, whether positive 
    or negative
  Consider changes to your business activity
  Make necessary adjustments to your business and 
    financial plan
Other Recordkeeping
Along with your financial records, you will want to make sure 
that you have an orderly and disciplined practice of storing 
other business records. Your success depends on creating 
and maintaining an effective recordkeeping system not just 
for your finances, but for other important documentation. 
Recordkeeping systems range from simple manila folder 
filing systems to commercial software programs to complex 
online cloud-based systems.
However you want to collect and store your records, 
you will want to make sure that you maintain the 
following types of documentation:
  Accounting records related to cash flow, income, 
    expenses, balance sheets, petty cash, etc.
  Client files
  Contracts and vendor files
  Corporate or organization records about meetings,  
    resolutions, etc.
  Bank and credit card statements
  Annual tax returns, quarterly tax filings, and other  
   tax documentation
  Personnel files (for specific requirements related to this,  
    consult with a qualified human resources professional  
   and/or SBDC Consultant)
  Inventory and status reports
  Vehicle use logs, travel logs, equipment logs, etc.
CHAPTER 4   —  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       59
Create Separate Bank Accounts  
for Your Business
Before you start accepting or spending money for your 
business, you should open a business bank account. 
Common business accounts include a checking account, 
savings account, credit card account, and merchant 
services account. Merchant services accounts allow you 
to accept credit and debit card transactions from your 
customers. 
 
Most business bank accounts offer perks that don’t come 
with a standard personal bank account. Examples include:
Some business owners open a business account at the 
same bank they use for their personal accounts. Rates, fees 
and options vary from bank to bank, so you should shop 
around to make sure you find the lowest fees and the
best benefits. 
When you’re opening a business checking or savings 
account, ask about the following items:
  Introductory offers 
  Interest rates for savings and checking 
  Interest rates for lines of credit 
  Transaction fees 
  Early termination fees 
  Minimum account balance fees 
 
When you’re opening a merchant services account, 
you’ll want to consider additional factors, such as: 
  Discount rate (the percent charged for every  
    transaction processed) 
  Transaction fees (any additional amount charged for  
    each transaction)
  Address Verification Service (AVS) fees
  Automatic clearing house (ACH) daily batch fees 
  Monthly minimum fees
Payment processing companies are an increasingly popular 
alternative to traditional merchant services accounts. 
Payment processing companies sometimes provide extra 
functionality, like accessories that let you use your phone 
to accept credit card payments. The fee categories that 
you need to consider will be similar to merchant services 
account fees. If you find a payment processor that you like, 
remember that you’ll still need to connect it to a business 
checking account to receive payments. 
 
Opening a business bank account is easy once you’ve 
picked your bank. Simply go online or to a local branch to 
begin the process. Banks typically ask for the following 
information when you open a business account, but some 
banks may ask for more. 
  Employer identification number (EIN) (or a social security    
   number, if you’re a sole proprietorship) 
  Your business’ formation documents 
  Ownership agreements
  Business license
Protection and Security
Business banking offers limited personal liability 
protection by keeping your business funds separate 
from your personal funds. Merchant services also 
offer purchase protection for your customers to 
ensure that their personal information is secure. 
Professionalism and 
Convenience
Customers will be able to pay you with credit cards 
and make checks out to your business instead 
of directly to you. Plus, you’ll be able to authorize 
employees to handle day-to-day banking tasks on 
behalf of the business. 
Preparedness
Business banking usually comes with the option of 
a line of credit for the company. This can be used in 
the event of an emergency or if your business needs 
new equipment. 
Purchasing Power
Credit card accounts can help your business 
make large startup purchases and help establish a 
positive credit history for your business.
CHAPTER 4   —  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
60       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Password 
Security
Do you save passwords in your browser?
How safe are your Social Media passwords?
Do you write passwords down?
Do you save passwords in a file on your computer?
Do you have a password on your phone?
Do you use complex passwords?
Do you use shared passwords?
Do you use the same password for multiple logins?
Computer 
Security
Is your technology up to date?
Who takes care of your computers?
Who do you call in the event of an emergency?
Who takes care of your software?
Do you use antivirus and malware protection?
Do you use cloud services?
Are your computers physically secure?
Are your computers encrypted?
Do you share computers?
Internet 
Security
Who is your provider?
Do you have a firewall?
Who uses your internet?
Do you use Social Media?
Who is watching out for you on the internet?
Do you deal with vendors on the internet?
Do you do business internationally?
Businesses have become increasingly engaged 
in online business activities like sales, vendor 
purchases, email, marketing, website hosting, 
e-commerce, and much more. For some businesses, 
your entire operation can be quite literally in your 
computer’s hard drive and online. 
Protecting your business and your customers’ 
data from online threats has become a critical 
consideration for everyone, especially small 
businesses. Guidelines about the sharing of 
passwords, use of personal devices on business 
systems, and the reporting of possible security 
breaches should be covered in a signed policy 
document such as an Acceptable Use Pxolicy.
      Discover more about employee policies in 
Chapter 6: “Hiring Your First Employee”
On the following pages, we have a cybersecurity 
planning sheet and a checklist of ransomware dos 
and don’ts. These documents will help you create a 
protection plan for your business’ records and help 
you respond to cybersecurity threats.
Cybersecurity:
Take It Seriously!
CHAPTER 4   —  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       61
Smartphone 
Security
Who is your provider?
What is on your phone?
Do you lock your phone?
Do you leave wireless on?
   (e.g. Bluetooth, WiFi or Location)
Who uses your phone?
Are your smartphones encrypted?
Do you use antivirus and malware protection?
Can you remote locate and remote wipe 
   your smartphone?
Data 
Security  
Where is your data?
Do you have a disaster recovery plan?
Do you know who to call when your data is gone?
How do you protect your data?
Do you have a plan in case your data is unavailable?
Do you have a data classification policy?
Do you have a data handling standard?
Do you know what data you have?
CHAPTER 4   —  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
Cybersecurity Planning Sheet
62       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Ransomware Attack Dos and Don’ts
Ransomware locks all available files on your computer system, and the attackers will make you pay for a code to restore them. 
It may also lead to losing all of your files! Ransomware attacks can affect any business. If you fall for it, it will infiltrate your 
system, regardless of company size.
Do Don’t
Backup your computer 
somewhere you cannot always 
access. The more often, 
the better. Ransomware will 
encrypt anything it has access 
to, including network drives, 
connected local drives and any 
system that acts as external 
storage.
Have a disaster recovery plan.
Ransomware can be a disaster. 
Make sure you have planned for it 
and have tested every option.
Train your people, even in a 
small company. Training is the 
best defense; people are often the 
weak link that lets ransomware in.
Use a firewall. Some ransomware 
attacks through known security 
issues; make sure it can’t get 
through with a business-class 
firewall.
Open emails from 
unknown sources. Ransomware 
will encrypt anything it has access 
to, including network drives, 
connected local drives, and any 
system that acts as external 
storage.
Underestimate the threat. 
No one is safe from ransomware.
Wait to install updates 
or security patches. Many 
ransomware exploits are solved 
quickly in patches. Waiting to 
update your system could leave you 
and others vulnerable.
Keep your data only on site. 
Remember that you should keep 
several copies of your data as a 
backup: three copies, two media 
types, one off-site.
Use IPS/IDS. Intrusion Detection  
System (IDS) and Intrusion 
Prevention System (IPS) can isolate 
an attack as it gets in. It also offers 
protection for your users when they 
are in the wrong place.
Use antivirus and 
antimalware software.  Antivirus 
software saves people all the time. 
Make sure you pick a good (not 
free) version of a trusted antivirus 
program.
Use a DNS protection system. 
DNS Protection is the concept of 
protecting the DNS service as a 
whole, sometimes with an emphasis 
on security. Sometimes one extra 
layer of security is something that 
will save you. 
Know who to call. Whether it is 
for ransomware or other questions, 
don’t rely just on internet searches. 
Look for a credible company to help 
you when you need it.
4 8
CHAPTER 4   —  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       63
Create Separate Bank Accounts for Your Business  
One place where you don’t have to worry about cybersecurity as much is a bank. Before you start 
accepting or spending money for your business, you should open a business bank account.
 
Examples include:
Preparedness 
Business banking usually comes with the option of a line of credit for 
the company. This can be used in the event of an emergency or if your 
business needs new equipment.
Purchasing Power 
Credit card accounts can help your business make large startup 
purchases and help establish a positive credit history for your business. 
Professionalism and Convenience 
Customers will be able to pay you with credit cards and make checks out 
to your business instead of directly to you. Plus, you’ll be able to authorize 
employees to handle day-to-day banking tasks on behalf of the business. 
Protection and Security
Business banking offers limited personal liability protection by keeping 
your business funds separate from your personal funds. Merchant 
services also offer purchase protection for your customers to ensure that 
their personal information is secure.
CHAPTER 4   —  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
64       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
CHAPTER 4   —  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
Some business owners open a business account at the same bank they use for their personal 
accounts. Rates, fees and options vary from bank to bank, so you should shop around to make sure 
you find the lowest fees and the best benefits. When you’re opening a business checking or savings 
account, ask about the following items: 
  Introductory offers 
  Interest rates for savings and checking 
  Interest rates for lines of credit 
  Transaction fees 
  Early termination fees 
  Minimum account balance fees 
 
When you’re opening a merchant services account, you’ll want to consider additional 
factors, such as: 
  Discount rate (the percent charged for every transaction processed) 
  Transaction fees (any additional amount charged for each transaction)
  Address Verification Service (AVS) fees
  Automatic clearing house (ACH) daily batch fees 
  Monthly minimum fees
Payment processing companies are an increasingly popular alternative to traditional merchant services 
accounts. Payment processing companies sometimes provide extra functionality, like accessories that 
let you use your phone to accept credit card payments. The fee categories that you need to consider 
will be similar to merchant services account fees. If you find a payment processor that you like, 
remember that you’ll still need to connect it to a business checking account to receive payments. 
 
Opening a business bank account is easy once you’ve picked your bank. Simply go online or to a 
local branch to begin the process. Banks typically ask for the following information when you open a 
business account, but some banks may ask for more. 
  Employer identification number (EIN) (or a social security number, if you’re a sole proprietorship) 
  Your business’ formation documents 
  Ownership agreements 
  Business license
 
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       65
CHAPTER 4   —  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
5
MARKETING YOUR  
BUSINESS
66       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Marketing Your Business
What Defines Your Brand?
Every business has a brand, but the most successful businesses have brands that have been carefully 
and thoughtfully designed. Branding is the process of crafting your business’ identity, messaging, and 
overall ethos. Even though branding and marketing are closely related, they are different processes.
Think of it this way: branding is the process of deciding on the story you want to tell about your company, 
both visually and verbally. Meanwhile, marketing is the process of going out and telling that story to 
consumers in a compelling way.
Many people think of visual elements when they think of a brand: logos, color schemes, particular ads 
they’ve seen, and so on. Other people may think of an advertising tagline or a news article they read 
about the brand. For local businesses, customers may associate a brand with a particular person or 
group of people.
Keep in mind that since your brand is the story of your business, even very deliberate and effective 
marketing and branding can’t completely define your brand. For example, if a potential customer hears 
from a friend about a negative experience with your business, no amount of advertising is likely to make 
the potential customer forget it. Whether you like it or not, that negative experience is now part of your 
brand in that potential customer’s mind.
If you don’t have a strong sense of your brand, it will be difficult to market your business. After all, if you 
don’t understand what’s special about your business and your products or services and what’s unique 
about your story, then how can you communicate it to anyone else?
To define your brand better, write down the answers to questions like:
  Why does your business exist?
  What is your business’ story? How does it relate to your own story?
  What problems can your products or services help customers solve?
  Why would customers choose your business over the competition?
  What other brands do you look up to?
  What do you want people to think of when they hear your business’ name?
While all your marketing efforts (and many other factors) will play a role in defining your brand, there’s 
no denying that strong visual elements like logos, color schemes, and headlines play an enormous role 
in influencing how consumers perceive brands. At the very least, your business should have a logo, and 
you should strive for consistency in the look and voice of your marketing communications.
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       67
I want you to find it so interesting 
that you buy the product.” 
 
– David Ogilvy, Ogilvy on Advertising
“I do not regard advertising as entertainment 
or an art form, but as a medium of information. 
When I write an advertisement, I don’t want you 
to tell me that you find it ‘creative.’
Setting a Marketing Budget
Setting money aside for marketing may seem difficult, but remember that your business can’t succeed without marketing. As 
a general rule, many experts agree that small businesses with revenues less than $5 million should devote about 7-8% of 
their annual revenue to marketing. Some businesses, like retail stores, may require a lot more; many retail stores spend up to 
20 percent of their annual revenue on marketing during their early years.
Your marketing budget will also determine whether you’re able to hire a professional marketer or a marketing agency to help 
you build your brand and grow your business. A good marketing partner can not only help you create a thorough marketing 
plan but should be able to help you execute every aspect of the plan. Make sure the marketing partner readily communicates 
with you and provides clear billing and reporting that you can understand. You should always know what you’re paying for 
and what results you’re getting from the money you devote to marketing.
If you don’t have the budget to hire an agency or a marketing professional, that’s okay too. It may take time and effort, but 
there are always options to effectively market your business, even if you’re working on your own and don’t have experience 
in marketing.
Judging the Success of Your Marketing Strategies
No matter what marketing tactics you use, it’s important to track results and make sure your marketing efforts are delivering 
a clear return on investment (ROI). To decide whether your marketing efforts are succeeding, you’ll need to establish 
key performance indicators (KPIs), which we’ll discuss more later in this chapter as we guide you through the process of 
creating a marketing plan.
Remember that just because a marketing tactic doesn’t succeed instantly doesn’t mean it’s time to throw it away. It takes 
time to develop strong marketing messages and identify the most effective ways to reach your desired customers. However, 
you may need to discard marketing tactics that consistently fail to deliver returns, even after many adjustments.
On the other hand, don’t assume because a marketing tactic has worked in the past that it will continue to work in the 
future. Markets are always changing, and so are your customers. Even the most tried-and-true strategies need to be 
continuously evaluated based on KPIs and then adjusted or discarded if they’re no longer delivering results.
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
68       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Creating a Marketing Plan
Your business can’t succeed without an effective marketing and communications strategy, which is why you 
should begin developing this strategy from the moment you start planning your business and continue to 
refine it for as long as your business exists.
Creating a marketing plan involves four essential steps:
1   Assess your company’s current situation
2   Identify your target audience
3   Define your marketing goals
4   Research and select your tactics
In the following sections, we’ll discuss these steps in greater detail.
Be brutally honest when identifying your company’s weaknesses and the threats you face — knowing them is the 
only way to overcome them. Don’t forget you may already have information about these areas from your
market research.
Assess Your Company’s Current Situation 
The first section of your marketing plan should define your business and its products or services, then 
explain how your business sets itself apart from the competition. Marketers use a time-tested method to 
analyze a company’s current situation, and this method is called a SWOT analysis. To perform a SWOT 
analysis, you need to identify your company’s strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats.
Strengths
How are your company’s products and services different from and better than your competitors’ 
offerings? Why is your business in a better position to succeed than theirs?
Weaknesses
What do your competitors do better than you? What advantages do they have over you? 
Opportunities
What are the opportunities you created your business to capitalize on? Is the market for your products or 
services expanding, or is there a current need in the market that’s going unmet?
Threats
What factors could realistically cause your business to fail? These could be factors within your control 
(like organizational issues) or outside your control (like an economic downturn or competitors lowering 
their prices).
STEP 1:
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       69
Tips for Identifying Competitors
Remember that your strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats are only important as they relate 
to your competitors. After all, if your company had no competition, you wouldn’t need marketing at all. 
But every business has competitors, no matter how innovative or unusual their products or services are.
To help you perform your SWOT analysis, you should gather plenty of information about your 
competitors. Make sure to identify your indirect competitors as well as direct competitors. For example, 
if your company provides guard services to warehouses, other companies that offer guard services 
within your service area are your direct competitors. However, electronic alarm systems for warehouses 
might provide an alternative to human guards, so businesses selling alarm systems may be indirect 
competitors.
To help you objectively evaluate your company against your competitors, try to fill out the table below. 
Rate your company and your top two competitors in each of the areas listed using a 1-5 scale, with 5 as 
very strong and 1 as very weak. Remember to be as impartial and honest as you can.
Tips for Identifying Your Company’s Unique Value Proposition
Also known as a “unique selling proposition,” your unique value proposition describes what your 
company offers, how you help solve customers’ needs and how your company differs from the 
competition. Identifying your unique value proposition is an essential part of assessing your company’s 
strengths. Communicating these strengths is the most important purpose of your marketing messages 
and your overall marketing strategy.
Once you’ve created a SWOT analysis and taken a snapshot of your company’s current situation, your 
marketing plan has a strong foundation. You now know your company’s most important advantages and 
opportunities as well as the potential challenges your marketing strategy needs to overcome.
Quality
Price/value
Convenience
Location
Customer service
Other
Your Company Competitor 1 Competitor 2
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
70       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Identify Your Target Audience 
Next, you’ll want to identify your ideal customer — the type of person or company who is most likely to 
buy your company’s products or services. (Make sure to stay grounded in the real world when thinking 
about your ideal customer — a billionaire tech entrepreneur who wants to buy out your inventory might 
be the “ideal customer,” but you can’t count on them coming along.) Marketers call your ideal customers 
your “target audience.”
Keep in mind also that the target audience for your product may be different from the end user. For 
example, if you create toys for very young children, the children won’t be the ones buying your toys. In 
this case, the children’s parents are your primary target audience.
The characteristics you’ll want to identify to define your target audience will differ depending on whether 
your business is primarily based around business-to-consumer (B2C) sales or business-to-business 
(B2B) sales.
For B2C businesses, the characteristics of your target audience may include:
  Geographic location  
  Age   
  Gender   
  Marital status
  Family size
  Education 
  Income   
  Occupation
  Hobbies 
  Buying frequency 
  Attitudes toward your product and competitor products
If you operate a B2B company, the characteristics of your target audience may include:
  Geographic location
  Industry (NAICS or SIC code)
  Size (number of employees or annual sales)
  Length of time in business 
  Type of products or services they provide
  Whether they import or export products  
  Buying process
  Decision-makers
  Level of need for your product
  Degree of loyalty to vendors
  Buying frequency 
STEP 2:
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       71
You can assemble much of the information about your target audience from the data you gathered during 
market research, although identifying all the important characteristics of your target audience may require 
additional research as well. If you have current customers or clients, asking them questions is one of the 
best ways to gather more information about your target audience. Ask them how they found out about your 
business, what they like about your brand, where they tend to shop and purchase products, what they read 
and watch, and which websites and social media platforms they use.
Targeting Your Marketing With Audience Segments
Many businesses will have more than one type of person or company who is likely to be interested in their 
products or services. To represent these different types of potential customers, you can break down your 
target audience into smaller audience segments. To do this, group types of prospective customers into 
categories based on similar characteristics so you can reach and serve them more relevant marketing 
messages.
As an example, let’s return to the idea that your company makes toys and games for children, only now you 
make them for children who are a bit older — say ages 10-12. These children probably don’t have their own 
income yet, but they may have an allowance, and they almost certainly tell their parents when they want a toy 
or game. The parents may go out and buy your toys and games on their own as a gift for their child, but they 
may also buy your products because their child saw an ad online and won’t leave them alone about it.
In this case, both the children and their parents are part of your target audience. Children spend their time 
differently and respond to different types of ads compared to their parents, so you’ll need to come up with 
different strategies to market to them. The children and their parents are two different segments of your 
target audience.
One of the best ways to document the segments of your target audience is to develop a simple, one-
paragraph profile of a fictional person who embodies the qualities of that audience segment. You will need 
a profile for each audience segment. Marketers call these profiles “personas,” and they can help you keep 
track of your audience segments, relate to them as real people, and refer to them clearly and memorably.
Remember that your ideal potential customers already have busy lives and established buying patterns that 
don’t include your business. If you want to convert them into a real customer, you’ll need to give them a good 
enough reason to break those established patterns and form a relationship with your business.
Also, don’t forget that your target audience may include existing customers and clients, especially if your 
business model encourages repeat transactions. There are always competitors looking to lure away 
your loyal customers, so don’t take them for granted! Tailoring specific marketing efforts to your existing 
customers, including loyalty programs, rewards and discount offers, can help you reinforce the strength of 
your existing customer base while you attract new customers and prospects to grow your business.
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
72       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Define Your Marketing Goals 
A good marketing plan needs to define specific, measurable goals tied to sales and profitability. What 
do you hope to accomplish with your marketing efforts? Are you trying to bring in five new customers a 
day, ten clients a month or $100,000 a year?
One of the best ways to make sure you’re setting the right goals is to make sure your goals are SMART, 
which is an acronym that stands for specific, measurable, attainable, relevant and time-bound. Here are 
some examples to help you develop SMART goals:
Your goals will be unique to your business, but as you set them, you should tie them to key performance 
indicators (KPIs). KPIs are measurements that communicate important information about the health and 
future of your business. Examples of possible KPIs for your marketing efforts include:
  Revenue
  Sales growth rate
  Number of leads
  Cost per lead
  Number of customers
  Cost of acquiring a customer
If goals are the destination you want to get to, KPIs are the signs telling you you’re headed in the right 
(or wrong) direction. 
  Example of a non-specific goal: Raise money.
  Example of a specific goal: Raise $10,000 by September 1.
  Example of a non-measurable goal: Improve customer satisfaction.
  Example of a measurable goal: Improve the number of highly satisfied responses on customer surveys by 25%.
  Example of an unattainable goal: Make $100,000 in a month when you’ve never made that much in a year.
  Example of an attainable goal: Increase monthly revenue by 10 percent.
  Example of an irrelevant goal: Improve our company image.
  Example of a relevant goal: Increase sales among one audience segment by 30 percent.
  Example of a non-time-bound goal: Increase revenue to $150,000.
  Example of a time-bound goal: Increase average quarterly revenue to $37,500 over the four quarters of next year.
Specific
Measurable
Attainable
Relevant
Time-Bound
STEP 3:
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       73
Research and Select Your Tactics  
Now that you know what you want to accomplish, it’s time to figure out the specific marketing methods 
you’ll use to reach your target audience and convert them into customers or clients. You need to develop 
strategies that incorporate your goals, build on your strengths and embrace your unique competitive 
advantages.
Marketers call the blend of strategies that a business uses a “marketing mix.” The exact mix of marketing 
tactics that makes the most sense varies widely from business to business, and finding that mix often 
takes a lot of experimentation. The most effective tactics for your business will depend on the nature of 
your business as well as on your target audience and how they behave.
For example, do your ideal customers typically make a buying decision because they saw a billboard 
or a TV ad? Or do you offer the type of product or service that people often purchase because they 
read an online review or saw a post about it on social media? Understanding how your target audience 
consumes information and makes purchasing choices will help you make informed decisions about how 
to spend your marketing and advertising dollars to get the most effective results.
Examples of some popular and proven marketing tactics are:
  Billboard and poster ads
  Television and radio advertisements
  Print media ads (newspapers, magazines)
  Newsletters and direct mail
  Brochures, letterheads and business cards
  Promotional events
  Direct sales (telephone, door-to-door, etc.)
  Online advertising, including:
 • Website
 • Social media
 • Email advertisements
 • Video ads
 • Display advertisements on other websites
 • Ads in search engines like Google and Bing
Every marketing tactic has its benefits and downsides compared to other tactics. For example, billboards 
and television ads can reach lots of people, but they cost a lot of money up front. These ads also don’t 
specifically target your potential customers, so you’re paying to show your ad to a lot of people who have 
no chance of becoming customers.
Also, you can plan and execute some tactics by yourself, like direct sales, direct mail and building a 
website. Other tactics, like running television, radio and print media advertisements, will require you to 
work with a media buyer or other agent who may require a commission or fee.
There is no universal right or wrong answer when it comes to a mix of marketing tactics — only what 
makes sense for your business based on your target audience and your budget.
STEP 4:
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
74       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Developing Your Message
Once you have a documented marketing plan in place, you will need to start creating your marketing assets. Many people who 
are inexperienced in marketing believe that the most important quality of a good advertisement or ad campaign is that it gets 
the attention of potential customers. However, that’s not true. The most important criteria to judge your marketing efforts is 
whether they lead to more clients or customers and help your business grow. If an advertisement or marketing strategy gets 
people’s attention but doesn’t lead them to trust your business and purchase your products and services over those of your 
competition, then that advertisement or strategy does nothing for your business.
Regardless of the medium or strategy, most effective marketing messages contain four fundamental elements:
1   A clear, concise and memorable headline
2   A value proposition that briefly explains why your product can help meet potential customers’ needs (and do so better  
     than alternatives)
3   A reason for the potential customer to act now, like a time-based promotional offer such as a coupon code or an  
     explanation of how your product or service will improve your  customers’ lives immediately
4   A clear call-to-action (CTA) statement that tells the customer what you want them to do (call now, sign up, subscribe, try  
      a free sample, etc.)
Most ads should also contain an eye-catching image that conveys and reinforces the mood or tone you want your ad to 
capture. Make sure your images fit the scale of your advertisement, look clear, and are visually pleasing.
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       75
Choosing Your Marketing Mix
If you understand your target audience, then you’ve already got much of the information you need to choose a successful 
marketing mix. Your goal is to find your potential customers and deliver marketing messages that will engage them and 
energize them to become customers. Where that process happens and how it happens depend on the behavior of your 
target audience.
To evaluate your options for your marketing mix, ask yourself the following questions about your target audience:
  What types of advertising messages do they notice and respond to?
  What types of media do they watch, read and interact with?
  Where do they look for information about products and services?
  Where do they make purchasing decisions?
  How long does it take them to make a purchasing decision?
Besides asking questions about your target audience, it also helps to observe what your competitors are doing. Study the 
strategies your competitors use to market themselves and ask questions like:
  What are my competitors doing well? What are they doing poorly?
  Are there things about my competitors’ marketing tactics that I like but feel I could improve on?
If you’re able to identify what marketing strategies your competitors are using successfully while discarding the tactics that 
don’t deliver results for them or wouldn’t work for your business, you’ll most likely have the beginnings of a very effective 
marketing mix. 
Regardless of which tactics you decide are best, it’s usually not wise to spend your entire budget on one marketing tactic. 
No matter how much research you perform or planning you undertake, there’s no surefire way to know which marketing 
tactics will deliver the best results without trying them, observing the results, and adjusting them over time.
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
76       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
One system that many marketers use 
to evaluate marketing strategies and 
decide on a marketing mix is called 
the four Ps. The four Ps are:    
If you understand the four Ps as 
they relate to your business, you 
can use them to make decisions 
about which marketing strategies are 
likely to deliver the best results for 
you. To understand the four Ps, ask 
questions like these:
What does my product or service do for  
the buyer? What need does it meet?
What features does my product have? 
How do those features compare to those of  
my competitors’ products?
How and where will the customer 
use my product?
What does my product look and feel like? 
Does it create an experience for the customer?
How do I differentiate my product from competing 
products?
What is the value of my product or service for the buyer?
How do my prices compare to those of my competitors?
Are my customers price-sensitive? If I raise or lower  
prices, will they respond quickly?
If I offer discounts to specific customers or audience  
segments, will it increase sales and/or revenue 
significantly?
Where do my potential customers look for products
and services?
Where do they make purchasing decisions?
Where do my potential customers work?
Where do they spend their free time?
Where can I get my marketing messages in front of my  
target audience? When are they most likely to respond  
to those messages?
How many times do I need to interact with my potential 
customers before they will make a purchasing decision? 
(Remember that one interaction is rarely enough to  
convince someone to buy a product or service.)
What is the best time to promote? Is my business 
seasonal or cyclical?
How do my competitors promote their products and  
services? How will my marketing messages stand out  
from theirs and capture the attention of potential 
customers?
The Four Ps of Marketing
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
01
PRODUCT
What are 
we selling?
Where and 
how will we 
sell it?
02
PLACE
How much 
are we selling 
it for?
03
PRICE
How will we 
let people 
know we are 
selling it?
04
PROMOTION
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       77
Create a Marketing Calendar  
Once you decide on the blend of marketing tactics that will make up your marketing mix, you’ll want to create a 
marketing calendar that will establish timelines, implementation schedules, budgets, and assigned responsibilities 
for all your marketing campaigns. Ideally, your marketing calendar should detail all aspects of all your marketing 
activities for the entire year.
Online tools exist that can help you create a calendar that’s clean and easy to look at, but you can also use a 
spreadsheet program to create a basic calendar that meets your needs. Whatever tool you use to create your 
calendar, make sure you update entries, keep track of important milestones and note your results.
Although creating a detailed marketing calendar takes time and patience, it’s worth the investment. Consistency 
is key when marketing your business, and if you only make time for marketing when you feel like you have time to 
spare, your marketing efforts will be spotty and occasional — if they happen at all.
Publicity and Public Relations
Public relations (PR) is different from marketing, but the two are closely related and sometimes overlap. Public 
relations is the process of creating and cultivating a positive reputation with the public. Like marketing, public 
relations activities can occur on many different channels, including traditional media, social media and face-to-face 
communications.
When many people hear the term public relations, they think of a big company responding to a disaster with a 
carefully planned news conference or press release. But public relations isn’t just for emergencies, and it’s not 
just for large corporations, either. For example, many small businesses engage in public relations every day by 
maintaining their social media pages and interacting with members of the public online. Others are active in the 
community on a regular basis. These activities can be seen and shared in the public arena, and whether they 
directly relate to your business or not, they will be associated with your business in the public eye.
Aspects of your business you may want to publicize can include:
  Success stories from your clients or customers
  New products or offerings
  Community involvement and charitable events
  Your expertise within your field or market
Hosting events, workshops and seminars — including online “webinars” — are also forms of marketing that double 
as public relations.
Many businesses work with PR professionals who handle their public relations campaigns. Even if you don’t have 
much budget to devote to PR, you may be able to hire a consultant who works with you for a few hours a week 
on your PR efforts. And even if you have no money to spend on PR at all, you can still cultivate relationships with 
reporters, bloggers and other media contacts by contacting them with news about your business. Just remember 
to keep your messages relevant. Sending even one or two personalized PR communications to local media 
professionals who may be interested in your business’ story is much better than sending thousands of messages to 
a mailing list full of random people who don’t care.
STEP 5:
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
78       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
The Power of Online Marketing
Very few businesses today can succeed without an online presence, and even fewer should want to. For many small 
businesses, online marketing should be the first avenue they explore to help them engage with potential new customers and 
establish their brand.
Today, 82 percent of consumers conduct research online before buying a product or service, and the average consumer 
now spends more time online than with all other types of media combined. As more customers use the internet to research 
products and make purchases, online marketing can deliver more of the benefits of traditional marketing tactics like TV and 
radio ads without high up-front costs and risks.
Creating a Website
The first and most important step to establishing an online presence is to create a website. Many online services allow you 
to register a domain name (the URL or online address of your website; for example, www.mymichigansmallbusiness.com). 
Then, you can create your website using a customizable template. Using these tools, most people can create a functional, 
professional-looking website for their business in a matter of days or even hours.
The most important qualities of a good website are:
1   It’s visually appealing
2   Its appearance, feel and content line up with the look, personality and voice you’ve established for your brand
3   It’s intuitive and easy to navigate for potential customers
4   It contains valuable offers and strong calls-to-action that encourage website visitors to become leads and  
     leads to become customers or clients
If your business requires a more complex website or you want something that looks more professional and polished, you may 
wish to hire an outside partner to build your website. In many cases, the up-front investment to have a professional build your 
website is worth it. However, make sure to compare your options and shop around aggressively for the best price, which is not 
always the cheapest price. A simple website containing a handful of pages should not cost your company tens of thousands 
of dollars. Make sure to ask for examples of work before choosing a partner for your website build, and ask to see mockups 
and working drafts throughout the process. If you’re not happy with any aspect of the website, speak up right away.
If you hire someone to build a website for your company, make sure you own your website’s domain name and have full access 
to the website at all times. If you don’t, you may run into serious problems if you want to hire a different person to manage the 
website or decide to manage it on your own.
The Michigan SBDC is an official partner of “Grow With Google,” a series of courses designed to teach entrepreneurs how 
Google’s suite of tools can help them grow their businesses. View upcoming Grow With Google partner training events at: 
To get a personalized plan of Google products to help grow your business, you can also visit: 
smallbusiness.withgoogle.com
michigansbdc.org/training
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       79
Using Your Website to Grow Your Business 
Your website forms the foundation of your online presence and all your online marketing tactics. Once you’ve got a website, 
your next goals should be:
1   Use website contact forms and other tools to gather information from website visitors so you can convert them into leads
2   Follow up with leads and strengthen your relationship with them so you can convert them into customers or clients
3   Attract new visitors to your website by creating valuable content
4   Use the data you gather from your website and related tools to measure your results and keep improving your strategy
Attract New Visitors Through Search Engine Optimization (SEO)
One of the best and most sustainable ways to attract more visitors to your website is by engaging in search engine 
optimization. SEO is the process of improving your website so it ranks better in search engines like Google. That way, when 
people search online for products or services like yours or for related topics, they will be more likely to come across your 
website and visit it.
Creating Content for SEO
The single most important factor to SEO, according to statements published by Google, is to provide high-quality, original 
content (words, images, videos, etc.) on the pages of your website, especially the homepage.
Some of the most important types of content for SEO include:
  Your homepage
  Pages that describe your individual products or services
  An “about” page that tells your company’s story in brief
  Blog articles
  Lists of answers to frequently asked questions (FAQs)
  Images and videos
When you create content with SEO in mind, you’ll want to think about keywords, which are the words that your potential 
customers might plug into search engines when they’re searching for products or services like yours or when they are 
searching for related topics. For example, if you run a lawn care business, your target audience might be searching for terms 
like “lawn care services” and “lawn maintenance.”
Keywords break down into two broad categories: head terms and long-tail keywords:
Head Terms
These broad, one- or two-word topics usually get a lot of 
traffic, but that traffic can be very mixed. Some people are 
just trying to learn more about it, while others may be trying 
to purchase.
Examples: lawn care, lawn maintenance, grow a lawn, seed 
a lawn, fertilize a lawn, etc.
Long-Tail Keywords
These longer phrases tend to get less traffic, but people 
are searching for very specific topics
Examples: how to plant Kentucky Bluegrass, how much 
fertilizer does my yard need, best lawn care service in 
Michigan, cheapest lawn care service near me, free 
estimates for lawn maintenance, etc.
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
80       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Many business owners want to rank at the top of Google for head terms. If you’re operating a lawn care 
service, wouldn’t it be great to be number one for “lawn care”? The truth is, not really. First, you’d be 
competing with every other lawn care service that exists online, which means bringing a very big budget. 
Second, most searches on the internet (over 70%) are actually for those long-tail keywords. If someone 
searches for “lawn care,” they could be looking for a service, but they could also be looking for jobs, 
tutorials to do it themselves, statistics and facts, or any number of other things unrelated to your business. 
But if someone searches for the long-tail keyword “free estimate for lawn mowing near me,” you know they 
are shopping around for services. If you can rank well for that search (and other searches like it), then you 
are going to attract more qualified potential customers — and you’ll be able to provide them with more 
targeted messaging.
Not all of the best keywords to rank for are going to be focused on sales. A person searching for “how to 
plant Kentucky Bluegrass in Michigan” might be interested in lawn care services too — but they might not 
even know it yet. If you provide a helpful article for them and they find it in search engine results, they might 
visit that page on your website, browse around your site and realize your lawn care services could make 
their life easier. By targeting a long-tail keyword with your content, you just created a potential customer.
Website content should target a wide range of keywords. One of the easiest ways to balance the two is to 
base your core website pages (your homepage and pages about your products and services) around head 
terms and then write blogs based around long-tail keywords.
Keep in mind that search engines today are much smarter than in years past, and they can figure out the 
overall context of a webpage. If you want to write a page based around the keyword “lawn care services,” 
you don’t have to say “lawn care services” over and over when you write the page. In fact, doing that can 
make search engines ignore your website. Just write helpful information about lawn care and your products 
and services, using the term “lawn care services” once or twice (especially in the page title and main 
heading), and search engines will notice and understand what your page is about.
Also, search engines can recognize when keywords are similar and treat them as interchangeable. For 
an example, go to an online search engine and search for “lawn care services,” then try another search 
for “lawn maintenance services.” You’ll most likely see a lot of the same results, with maybe a few small 
variations. Your website probably doesn’t need two separate pages for “lawn care services” and “lawn 
maintenance services.” The main lawn care page can target both terms.
Other SEO Tactics
In addition to creating quality content, you can also improve your website’s SEO by:
  Improving the website’s structure — reducing the depth of your site’s navigation, getting rid of old 
    content, fixing or removing links that don’t work, etc.
  Reducing your site’s load times
  Making your site mobile-friendly
  Attracting links naturally from other websites by publishing useful content like blog articles
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       81
SEO tactics that don’t work include:
  Repeating the same keywords over and over on a page or cramming as many different keywords as 
    possible  into a page
  Creating lots of different pages and posts that mostly contain the same information
  Paying other websites to link to your website
Optimizing your site for search engines can take a while to deliver results, but the results you do receive 
from SEO will tend to be very sustainable, meaning they will build over time without additional spending 
and will remain stable even if you have to cut back on spending for a while.
Attract New Business Through Social Media  
Marketing your business on social media is a low-cost, low-risk form of marketing that only becomes 
more important as younger audiences get older and become the prime consumers of most products and 
services. Most young people today were raised with social media platforms and take them for granted as a 
part of their everyday lives. People from a wide variety of demographics regularly use popular platforms like 
Facebook and Twitter.
Some of the benefits of social media for small businesses include:
  The ability to promote awareness of your brand and content among new and different audiences, some 
    of whom you might not be able to reach any other way
  Building a dedicated following and keeping your existing customers engaged with your brand
  Improving performance in local search results (the location-specific results that appear at the top or side 
of many search engine results pages)
Note that many social media platforms offer “sponsored posts” and other types of premium posts that 
businesses can purchase for greater visibility, but you don’t need to spend any money to create the social 
media profiles that can help your business reach more potential customers.
Some of the most popular and well-established social media sites include:
FACEBOOK
INSTAGRAM
GOOGLE MY BUSINESS
YELP
YOUTUBE
LINKEDIN
TWITTER
SNAPCHAT
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
82       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
At a minimum, almost every business should have a Facebook page. Almost 70 percent of people in 
America use Facebook regularly, and businesses who don’t have a Facebook page will miss out on lots of 
potential opportunities to get their brand and messaging in front of potential customers.
You should also create a listing for your company on Google My Business. Google My Business is 
Google’s free listing service for businesses, and it also provides some social media capabilities. Creating 
your company’s Google My Business listing won’t cost you anything, and it will help your business appear 
in local search listings and maps results when potential customers in your area search for products and 
services similar to what you offer.
To create your Google My Business listing or to claim and update an existing listing for your business, visit: 
google.com/business goog
le.com/business/
Consider Pay-Per-Click (PPC) Advertising and Other Paid 
Online Advertisements to Gain New Visitors to Your Site  
If you’ve used a search engine before, you may notice that when you perform your search, you receive 
results labeled “AD” that appear first. Pay-per-click advertising lets your business bid money to appear in 
these ad results. With PPC ads, you pay a fee each time someone clicks on your ad. When the user clicks 
your ad, they’ll arrive at a page of your choosing on your website.
Every search engine has its own system for buying PPC ads. If you want your business to appear in the ad 
results at the top of Google searches, for example, then you’ll need to create an account with Google Ads.
Note that with PPC advertising, you pay each time someone clicks your ad, not each time someone 
becomes a customer or client. You can spend lots of money getting clicks and still receive no customers 
or clients at all, especially if the webpage where your ads lead doesn’t grab users’ attention or offer a clear 
value proposition and a quick call to action.
PPC ads at the top of search results aren’t the only type of paid online advertisements, though. You can 
pay for your advertisements to appear as display ads, which are banners and images on other websites. 
You can also create video ads and pay for them to run before videos on sites like YouTube. You can 
develop retargeting ads that follow your website visitors to other sites after they leave. You can pay for your 
company to sponsor content like blog articles on other websites. You can pay to run a variety of social 
media ads. There are lots and lots of options.
With so many options, creating and managing online ads can become complex, and it’s easy to spend 
lots of money on these types of ads without getting significant returns, especially if you’re new to online 
marketing. If you think online ads could be particularly helpful to your business, you may want to consider 
working with a marketing agency who can manage your online ad campaigns for you. Paid online ads also 
won’t deliver useful results if you haven’t already established a strong online presence, so it’s best to think 
of paid online advertisements as a “next step” you can consider after you’ve built a website, worked to 
optimize your website for search engines and created social media profiles for your business.
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       83
You Have Visitors to Your Website — Now What?
Once visitors get to your website, the quality and helpfulness of your content (including blogs, videos, 
images and website copywriting) as well as the user-friendliness and visual appeal of your website will 
decide whether visitors stay to learn more about your products or services.
Common reasons that website visitors quickly leave a website (or “bounce,” in online 
marketing terms) include:
  Long load times
  Unappealing design
  Confusing structure or lack of clear navigation options
  Annoying popups or other intrusive ads
For users who stay on your website, you want to provide not only educational content like blog articles 
they can browse if they just want information, but also content that can make potential customers feel more 
familiar with your brand and begin to trust you.
Examples of content that can develop trust in potential customers include:
  Testimonials from happy customers or clients
  Case studies that explain how you met a client’s or customer’s unique needs
  Information about you as a person and other key people from your business’s team
  Stories of your business engaging with the community in a positive manner
  Pictures of your company, your products and satisfied customers
However, even after viewing this information, many potential customers won’t feel ready to trust you with 
their hard-earned money just yet. For those customers, your goal is to gather their contact information by 
getting them to fill out a contact form on your website. Remember that your customers’ contact information 
is valuable to you, so you’ll have to offer them something of value in return for it. Examples of items you can 
offer in exchange for contact information include:
  Discounts, coupon codes and other promotional offers
  Chances to win prizes like apparel and other promotional items (“swag”)
  In-depth pieces of content, like infographics and ebooks, that provide lots of information about a topic 
    that interests your potential customers
  A subscription to your company newsletter (which may itself provide additional promotional offers)
The most effective website contact forms are simple and only require a name and an email address. If your 
business absolutely needs a phone number or mailing address to follow up with a lead, then you can ask 
for that information, but the number of website visitors who fill out your contact forms will drop dramatically 
with every additional piece of information you ask for.
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
84       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Always Follow Up With Online Leads
Once a website visitor gives you their contact information, they become a lead. That’s an important step, 
but the process of turning them into a customer is far from complete, and many businesses struggle to 
follow up with online leads effectively.
Many business owners think it’s acceptable to follow up with leads within a day or so, but studies show 
otherwise. In fact, experts have determined that you’re 100 times more likely to reach a lead and 21 times 
more likely to qualify that lead (meaning find out if they’re a realistic prospect or not) if you follow up within 
the first 5 minutes of them contacting you compared to following up within 30 minutes. And after 20 hours 
have passed from the initial contact, studies show there’s nothing you can do to improve your chances of 
contacting a lead and qualifying them — every call you make after that point only hurts your chances.
Certain businesses may be able to manage this problem by being extra-vigilant and dropping everything to 
contact a lead whenever one comes in. However, with online marketing, leads can come in at all hours of 
the day, even at night.
Various digital tools exist that can help you make sure no lead slips through the cracks and that every lead 
receives almost immediate follow-up, especially once you start getting more leads from your website than 
you can handle on your own. Options include:
For some businesses, none of these options can replace the personal touch of a direct phone call or face-
to-face interaction with a lead. However, these digital tools can help keep a lead engaged and keep your 
brand at the top of their mind long enough for you or a sales representative to contact them while they’re 
still excited about talking to you.
Call Centers 
You contract with a call center 
company that hires and trains 
employees to speak with leads 
and do some of the initial 
qualification work for you before 
passing the lead to you.
Managed Live Chat
You contract with a company 
that installs a chat popup on your 
website where visitors can chat 
with a trained representative. 
(Sometimes the initial chat will 
even be conducted by a software 
program that will ask for basic 
information and then refer the 
lead to a representative after 
that.)
Email Marketing
You create pre-built email 
messages that leads 
automatically receive after they 
fill out a contact form on your 
website. These emails can offer 
information that’s more tailored 
to the lead compared to what’s 
on your website. Many online 
tools allow you to deliver emails 
that are personalized to include 
the lead’s name and customized 
around the lead’s interests.
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       85
Never Stop Improving Your Online Marketing  
Google provides data to most website owners for free. Data helps you answer questions like:
  Where are my website’s visitors coming from?
  How many of them are becoming leads?
  Which marketing strategies are giving me the best return on my investment?
To start receiving this data, you’ll need to sign up for a Google Analytics account and add a tracking 
code to your website. (Google has resources related to Google Analytics that can walk you through this 
process.) Once you add the code to your website, Google will start collecting data. Before long, you can 
start viewing that data.
If you browse through the data for your website, you’ll see data like:
It can be hard to know what to make of these numbers at first, and even when they show improvement, 
it won’t necessarily translate to more customers and revenue for your business right away. However, if 
you see your users, page views and average time on page going up over time, then you’ll know you’re 
at least on the right track in terms of developing and promoting your website. Bounce rate should trend 
downward over time. If you don’t see improvement in these numbers or they start moving in the wrong 
direction over the long term, then it’s probably time to re-evaluate what you’re doing.
Managing Online Reviews
Most consumers today read online reviews when looking for a business or while shopping for specific 
products and services, so receiving good reviews can play an extremely important role in attracting new 
customers. Since reviews are so critical, sitting and waiting for them to come in isn’t enough. Instead, 
you should personally talk to your happy customers about leaving a review. Automated email messages 
are also one of the most reliable and least annoying ways to follow up with your customers so you can 
ask them to write a review. You should not offer monetary incentives for reviews, and you should not ask 
customers to leave a review while they are at your business. 
If your company receives a negative review, don’t panic. Instead, respond quickly but keep a level head. 
Don’t argue with the customer. Instead, respond politely and sympathetically. First, acknowledge their 
issue and then offer to make things right. If possible, offer to contact the customer offline and follow up 
with them further.
Users
This is the number of 
people who visited your 
website or a specific 
page over a given time 
period.
Page Views
This number tells how 
many views a particular 
page or set of pages 
received.
Average Time
on Page
This is the average 
amount of time users 
spend looking at a 
particular page or set 
of pages. 
Bounce Rate
This is the percent of 
visitors who leave a 
particular page without 
doing anything else on 
your site.
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
86       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
CHAPTER 5   —  MARKETING YOUR BUSINESS
Unfortunately, scammers know about the power of online reviews, and sometimes they’ll make up a 
negative review to try and get something from a business, even if they’ve never had any previous interaction 
with that business. If this happens to you and you’re sure it’s not a legitimate complaint from a real 
customer, try to contact the company operating the review platform — whether it’s Google, Facebook, Yelp 
or another site — to explain the situation and ask them to remove the review.
Judging the Success of Your Marketing Strategies
No matter what marketing tactics you use, it’s important to track results and make sure your marketing 
efforts are delivering a clear return on investment (ROI). Remember the key performance indicators (KPIs) 
you established in your marketing plan and try to track them for every marketing tactic you implement.
Just because a tactic doesn’t succeed instantly doesn’t mean it’s time to throw it away. It takes time to 
develop strong messaging and identify the best channels to reach your target audience. However, you may 
need to discard tactics that consistently fail to deliver returns, even after many adjustments.
On the other hand, don’t assume because a tactic has worked in the past that it will continue to work in the 
future. Markets are always changing, and so are your customers. Even the most tried-and-true strategies 
need to be continuously evaluated based on KPIs and then adjusted or discarded if they’re no longer 
delivering results.
I’ve Created My Plan — What’s Next?
Now that you’ve got a marketing plan, you know how to concentrate your limited resources on the greatest 
opportunities to increase sales so you can achieve a sustainable competitive advantage. You may want 
to draw from your marketing plan, especially your unique value proposition, to create a brand positioning 
statement. Your brand positioning statement should be a short (just a paragraph or two) internal document 
that communicates your brand’s unique strengths in relation to your competitors.
A brand positioning statement should clearly answer:
  Why should potential customers buy from you, and why should current customers keep coming back?
  When current and potential customers hear your company name, what should they think of?
The value of an effective brand positioning statement is that anyone in the company should be able to refer 
to it and quickly evaluate whether a marketing strategy or other business decision aligns with your brand 
positioning. If it doesn’t, then you may want to re-evaluate that strategy or decision.
Finally, remember that a marketing plan is always a work in progress. Every aspect of the plan, whether it’s 
your SWOT analysis, your target audience segments and personas or your mix of tactics and strategies, 
should be re-examined on a regular basis to respond to changes in the market and the ongoing evolution of 
your business.
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       87
CHAPTER 6   —  HIRING YOUR FIRST EMPLOYEE
6
HIRING YOUR FIRST  
EMPLOYEE
88       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Hiring Your First Employee
Craft Your Hiring Strategy
Employees add another layer of complexity to your business that requires careful consideration and 
planning. It is important to hire the right people, train them well, keep them happy so they will stay, and 
meet your tax obligations and other legal requirements. 
 
Hiring and managing employees requires good recordkeeping systems, careful compliance and a 
formal training plan to assure consistency and quality in performance. We encourage the following best 
practices:
  Prepare a written job description that indicates exactly what is expected of each employee.
    Make sure to set measurable metrics you can use to conduct performance reviews for each job.  
  Develop at least a simple employment handbook that outlines the following:
 • The mission and vision of the business
 • Employment policies such as work periods, time-keeping, holidays, etc.
 • Standards of employment 
There are many resources available that provide a framework for developing an employee handbook that 
meets state and federal legal compliance. Visit: www.michbar.org for more information.
Establish a hiring process.  A resume is a good way to get a first impression of a candidate. From 
there, selected candidates should complete an application form and schedule an interview. Ask each 
candidate for the same position the same questions and document the interview. There are many good 
sample sets of structured interview questions and application forms on the internet. Depending on the 
skill required for the position, many employers ask candidates to perform a trial assignment or take an 
aptitude test. 
It can also be helpful to have a stated 30- or 90-day introductory period during which the 
employer and employee can evaluate skills and compatibility with the organization and 
the position. Be sure to have a written declaration (handbook, application form or otherwise) that 
employment is “at will,” meaning the employer or employee may terminate the employment relationship at 
any time with or without cause or prior notice. 
In some cases, it may make sense to start slow and hire an intern before you hire a full-time employee. 
Hiring an intern is often a more affordable and practical option for small businesses that are just 
starting out. 
One place to start looking for your next great hire in Michigan is mitalent.org/employer. The U.S. Small 
Business Administration’s (SBA) also provides a wealth of online resources for hiring at:
 sba.gov/starting-business/hire-retain-employees/hire-your-first-employee
CHAPTER 6   —  HIRING YOUR FIRST EMPLOYEE
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       89
The Importance of Professional Assistance
Many business owners are wary about the cost of hiring professional consultants. The expense of using skilled professional 
consultants can be insignificant compared to the gains you could make by putting your time to revenue producing activity 
— or the costly consequences you could avoid if you don’t make the mistakes of failing to adhere to regulations, failing to 
submit documents, or making uninformed decisions.
There is no substitute for professional services to keep a business operating within financial and legal parameters. 
Professionals can assist with every aspect of a business, and they may be a good bridge as you grow from where you are 
now to hiring more full-time staff.
Listed below are some of the most important professional services most businesses need, especially early on.
  Financial consultants can help you handle accounting, bookkeeping, tax prep, and cash flow analysis and projections.
  Legal consultants can help you with your business organization, contracts, agreements, and other general consulting.
  Bankers can help with loans, billing, and credit.
  Information technology specialists can help you set up, manage, and monitor hardware, software, and internet connectivity.
  Insurance brokers can help you get the coverage you need at a competitive price.
  Marketing consultants or agencies can help you create your brand, build a website, manage your social media, develop 
    positive public relations, and more.
If you don’t have much experience in a particular area of your business, talking to a professional consultant can make your 
life a lot easier. A lot of small business owners feel bogged down by the daily grind of operations, and you may be able to put 
your skills to better use by working with outside professionals to handle the nitty-gritty, especially early on when you want to 
find new, talented employees to help you deliver your products and services to customers.
Technology is a uniquely difficult area for most business owners to handle on their own, especially since it is constantly 
evolving. Professional services can help you determine which types of software and hardware you need and how you can 
keep your records and the records of your customers secure.
      Discover more about recordkeeping  and cybersecurity in Chapter 4: “Financial Management”
Employee vs. Contractor
If you don’t have enough work for someone to join your team full time, hiring outside contractors or temporary help is also 
an option. However, important distinctions exist between employees and contractors. No matter who is helping you get 
the work done, their employment status will affect your tax burden, liability and benefit costs. The question of employee vs. 
contractor is a critical issue that does not have a simple answer and can have significant consequences. For example, if you 
classify an employee as an independent contractor and you have no reasonable basis for doing so, you may be held liable for 
employment taxes and penalties.
The IRS can apply many different tests to determine whether an individual is an employee or contractor. If you are 
considering using contractors instead of employees for your business, be sure to consult with a competent tax advisor 
before making a decision.
CHAPTER 6   —  HIRING YOUR FIRST EMPLOYEE
90       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Independent Contractors
People such as doctors, dentists, veterinarians, lawyers, accountants, contractors, subcontractors, public stenographers or auctioneers 
who are in an independent trade, business or profession and offer their services to the general public are generally considered 
independent contractors. However, whether these people are independent contractors or employees depends on the facts in each 
situation.
The general rule is that an individual is an independent contractor if the payer has the right to control or direct only the result of the work 
and not what will be done and how it will be done. The earnings of a person who is working as an independent contractor are subject to 
self-employment tax.
Helpful Tips for Deciding if Someone Is an Independent Contractor
Three types of evidence can help determine if the person has enough control and independence over their work to be considered an 
independent contractor:
Behavioral
Does your company control or have the right to control what the worker does and how the worker performs their job?
Financial
Are the business aspects of the worker’s job controlled by the payer? These factors include how the worker is paid, whether expenses are 
reimbursed, who provides tools and supplies, etc.
Type of Relationship
Are there written contracts or employee type benefits in place for insurance, vacation pay, retirement, etc.? Will the relationship continue? 
Is the work being performed a key aspect of your business?
You need to consider all of these factors to determine if a worker is an independent contractor. And it may not be a simple answer; some 
factors may indicate that the worker is an employee, while others indicate that the worker is an independent contractor. No set number of 
criteria makes the worker an employee or an independent contractor, and no one factor stands alone in making this determination.
The keys are to look at the entire relationship, consider your ability to direct and control the work, and document exactly how you 
determined whether someone would be considered an employee or independent contractor.
Form SS-8
If, after the evidence, you and the worker are still not sure about their status, Form SS-8, Determination of Worker Status for Purposes of 
Federal Employment Taxes and Income Tax Withholding (PDF) can be filed with the IRS: 
The IRS will review the facts and circumstances and officially determine the worker’s status. Unfortunately, it can take six months or longer 
to get an answer. If you continually hire the same types of workers to perform particular services, it may be a good idea file Form SS-8.
For more information on determining the differences between independent contractors and employees, you can refer to the IRS website: 
irs.gov/Businesses/Small-Businesses-&-Self-Employed/Independent-Contractor-Self-Employed-or-Employee  or you can consult with a 
qualified human resources professional.
irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/fss8.pdf
CHAPTER 6   —  HIRING YOUR FIRST EMPLOYEE
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       91
Training and Developing Employees 
Training employees is extremely important. You want well-qualified employees who properly and consistently represent your business, 
add value to your brand and image, maintain the quality you expect and build customer goodwill. A well-defined company policy handbook 
along with job descriptions that outline duties, responsibilities, ethical standards and criteria for success are important employment tools. 
 
To assure consistency and the quality of your employees’ work, we suggest that you continually document your steps, processes and 
requirements for specific tasks or activities and that you create a training plan to ensure every employee understands these expectations 
and requirements. Cross-training employees in areas outside their job descriptions can also be very beneficial for small businesses. Some 
employers may also choose to invest in their employees by giving them opportunities and incentives for specialized or advanced education 
and training.
 
To keep employees motivated and involved with the business, develop and maintain effective strategies and methods of two-way 
communication. Many business owners find it beneficial to include employees in strategic, operational and process planning and to work 
together to set individual goals that contribute to achieving overall business objectives.
Create Clear Expectations with an Acceptable Use Policy
In addition to open communication, you should make sure to clearly outline expectations with your employees. A handbook and clear job 
description can help employees understand what they do and how they should act as an employee. Acceptable Use Policies are guidelines 
and expectations a business should provide for employees to understand what is or is not allowed in the use of company-owned property.  
For example, you may have policies defining the acceptable use of company vehicles, copy machines, or other types of machinery and 
equipment. 
Given the high level of technology integration in businesses today, having an acceptable use policy related to your company’s technology 
equipment and systems is also extremely important. You may also wish to add policies regarding acceptable or prohibited use of personal 
technology devices in the workplace. Acceptable use policies serve as a means of limiting your liability should an employee misuse 
company equipment. They can also serve as a means of limiting workplace and workflow disruption.
Any policy should be understood by every employee, and acknowledgment of the policy or policies should be documented by a signed 
and dated receipt for the policy document. Reading and signing documents should be incorporated into new employee onboarding and 
training.
New Hire Reporting Requirements
Employers in all 50 states are required by federal law to report their new hires and re-hires to a state directory to expedite the collection of 
child support payments. This requirement establishes the employers’ role as a key partner in efforts to facilitate a family’s financial stability 
and for children to get the support to which they are entitled. You must report the following:
  New employees who reside or work in the State of Michigan to whom the employer anticipates paying earnings. 
    You must report employees, even if they work only one day and are terminated.
(continued on next page)
CHAPTER 6   —  HIRING YOUR FIRST EMPLOYEE
92       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
  Re-hires or recalled employees who return to work after being laid off, furloughed, separated, granted leave without pay 
    or terminated from employment after 60 days. Employers must also report any employee who remains on the payroll during 
    a break in service or gap in pay and then returns to work after 60 days. This includes teachers, substitutes, seasonal 
    workers, etc. 
  Temporary agencies must report any employee who they hire to report for an assignment. You only need to report 
    employees once; they do not need to be re-reported each time they transfer to a new client. They do need to be reported 
    as a re-hire if the worker has a break in service or gap in wages.
 
For more detailed information and reporting forms, contact the Michigan New Hires Operations Center at 800-524-9846  or 
by visiting:
 
Payroll Taxes 
Any business with employees must comply with federal and state payroll tax withholding requirements. It is critical that you 
understand the various deadlines and requirements, or that you use the services of someone who does. The major types of 
payroll taxes in Michigan are: 
  Income Tax Withholding (federal, state, and, if applicable, local) 
  Federal Social Security and Medicare Tax (FICA) 
  Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA) 
  Michigan Unemployment Tax (UIA) 
 
Every employee of your business is subject to these taxes — including you. Typically, business owners can expect to pay 
about 16% of their draws to satisfy the four types of taxes listed above. More information about the different payroll taxes is 
provided in the following sections.
Income Tax Withholding   
Any employer of one or more persons must withhold federal and state income taxes from wages paid to employees. A city 
income tax may also apply. To find out if a city levies a tax, contact that particular city tax assessor or city treasurer. Each 
employee should complete a Federal Withholding Exemption Certificate (W-4) and a Michigan Withholding Exemption 
Certificate (MI-W4). Your business will then need to withhold a designated amount of taxes from each employees’ wages, 
including the following:
Federal
For more information about federal income tax withholding, contact the IRS at 800-829-4933  or visit:  
 
State
Before hiring employees, an employer must register online at mto.treasury.michigan.gov or by contacting the Michigan 
Department of Treasury at 517-636-4660. State filing requirements vary based on the amount of state taxes that need to be 
withheld. You can also refer to the Michigan Business Taxes Registration Booklet, available online at:
michigan.gov/documents/taxes/518_10-17_605471_7.pdf
CHAPTER 6   —  HIRING YOUR FIRST EMPLOYEE
mi-newhire.com/mi-Newhire/default.aspx
irs.gov
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       93
City or Local
Contact your city treasurer to determine if a city income tax is applicable for your new employees. If the city does have an 
income tax, the city treasurer can provide the required registration forms.
Federal Social Security and Medicare Tax Withholding   
In addition to federal income taxes, federal law also requires that employers withhold and deposit Social Security taxes from 
employees’ wages. The employer must also pay an equal amount. Tax rates and maximum earnings subject to tax may vary 
from year-to-year. The latest information is available at irs.gov or by calling 800-829-4933 .
Federal Unemployment Tax Act   
The Federal Unemployment Insurance Act gives authority to the IRS to collect fees and for the U.S. Department of Labor to 
pay administrative expenses in order to operate state unemployment systems. If you file an application for an EIN with the IRS 
and indicate that employees will be hired, the IRS will mail a packet of information that includes forms for FUTA tax deposits 
and an annual report form. For more information about the FUTA tax, forms and deposit requirements, contact the IRS at 
800-829-4933  or online at irs.gov. 
Michigan Unemployment Tax   
The Unemployment Insurance Agency (UIA) operates Michigan’s unemployment insurance program, which collects 
unemployment taxes from employers and provides temporary income for workers who are unemployed through no fault of 
their own. Employers pay both state and federal unemployment taxes, and no deductions can be made from an employee’s 
wages to cover these taxes. 
 
Any business that employs one or more persons in Michigan is considered a contributing employer and is required to register 
with the Unemployment Insurance Agency. UIA offers an online process to register for and receive your UIA Employer 
Account Number, which is faster, easier, and more convenient than mailing in forms. With online registration, you can receive 
your UIA Employer Account Number in less than three days. To register online go to:  
 
The Michigan Business Taxes Registration Booklet also contains Form 518 for paper registration, and it’s a good reference 
tool to have on hand even if you’re registering online. It is located at:
A contributing employer is required to file tax reports with the UIA at the end of each calendar quarter and pays a state 
unemployment tax based on the rate applied. Contribution rates and requirements vary. Visit michigan.gov/uia or call the UIA 
at 800-638-3994  to learn more.
 
CHAPTER 6   —  HIRING YOUR FIRST EMPLOYEE
michigan.gov/uia/0,1607,7-118--89978--,00.html
michigan.gov/documents/518_3620_7.pdf
94       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Ensure Your Compliance With Employment Laws and Regulations 
Employers have legal and ethical obligations to provide a safe and equitable workplace. You must follow state and federal 
regulations governing workplace health and safety, as administered by the Michigan Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration. MIOSHA’s Consultation Education and Training (CET) Division offers free statewide safety and health 
assistance to employers and employees with a wide range of customized services to assist managers and staff in creating 
and maintaining a safe, healthy workplace. To learn more about CET services, call 800-866-4674  or download an
information flyer at:
 Michigan employers must also display certain posters in the workplace, and posters are available for free from various 
government agencies. A few key posters and the associated regulations are listed below, but there may be more poster 
requirements for your business if you have additional requirements under federal or state jurisdiction. 
 
At the end of this chapter, we have a larger list of state and federal required posters and agency contact information.
Americans With Disabilities Act    
Employers are required to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). The ADA gives civil rights protections to 
individuals with disabilities similar to those provided to individuals based on race, color, sex, national origin, age and religion 
(more information list below in the ‘Equal Employment Opportunity’ section). The ADA prohibits job discrimination against 
people with disabilities if they can perform the job’s essential functions with or without reasonable accommodations, and it 
guarantees equal opportunity for individuals with disabilities in public accommodations, employment, transportation, state 
and local government services and telecommunications. 
 
For publications and technical information about the ADA, contact the U.S. Department of Justice by phone at
800-514-0301  or online at: ada.gov.
 
 
Drug-Free Workplace  
Employers need to be aware of issues involving employees’ use of drugs and alcohol and how that can affect their work 
and your workplace. For additional information about programs to make the workplace free of drugs and/or alcohol, contact 
the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) at 800-967-5752  or by visiting: samhsa.gov. 
Equal Employment Opportunity  
The U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforcing federal laws that make it illegal 
to discriminate against a job applicant or employee based on the person’s race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy, 
gender identity and sexual orientation), national origin, age, disability or genetic information. It is also illegal to discriminate 
against a person because the person complained about discrimination, filed a charge of discrimination or participated in 
an employment discrimination investigation or lawsuit. Of the many antidiscrimination acts within EEOC, three standouts 
include (on next page):
CHAPTER 6   —  HIRING YOUR FIRST EMPLOYEE
michigan.gov/documents/dleg/wsh_cet0165_216929_7.pdf
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       95
Age Discrimination in Employment Act
This prohibits any form of discrimination against 
applicants or employees older than 40 because of 
their age.
Equal Pay Act (EPA)
Employers can’t pay female employees less than 
male employees for equal work on jobs that require 
equal skill, effort and responsibility.
Pregnancy Discrimination Act (PDA)
This act prohibits job discrimination based on pregnancy, exclusively as it pertains to an employee’s ability or inability to work.
Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA)  
The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) establishes a minimum wage, overtime pay requirements, recordkeeping regulations and 
youth employment standards covering employees in both the private sector and in federal, state and local governments. 
 
Employees whose jobs are governed by FLSA are either “exempt” or “nonexempt.” Nonexempt employees are eligible for 
overtime pay, and exempt employees are not. For an employee to be classified exempt from overtime FLSA requirements, the 
job must meet strict salary and duty tests. To learn more, you should consult with a qualified human resources professional or 
employment lawyer. For further information about FLSA, visit:
 
Family and Medical Leave Act  
The Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) allows employees with at least a year of service to take up to 12 weeks per year 
of unpaid, job-protected time off for the birth of a child or adoption of a child or to care for themselves or a sick child, spouse 
or parent who has a serious health condition. The FMLA applies to organizations with 50 or more employees. For more 
information, go to the U.S. Department of Labor’s website at: 
Michigan Minimum Wage Law  
Minimum wage can vary over time and can be different at the federal and state level. Employers subject to both state and 
federal minimum wage law should pay the higher applicable rate of the two.
 
Public Act 138 applies to employers in Michigan that have two or more employees age 16 and older. The law covers minimum 
wage, overtime, compensatory time, and wage rates for tipped employees. For more detailed Michigan minimum wage 
information visit: michigan.gov/lara/0,4601,7-154-59886_27909-330073--,00.html  or call the Wage and Hour Division
at 517-284-7800. 
Immigration documentation must be kept 
separate from personnel records and 
never inserted into an individual’s 
personnel file. 
CHAPTER 6   —  HIRING YOUR FIRST EMPLOYEE
dol.gov/whd/flsa
dol.gov/whd/fmla
96       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act  
While there may be changes in the future to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (also known as the Affordable 
Care Act or ACA), at the time of this guide’s printing, the regulation was still in effect. It was designed to ensure that 
Americans have access to quality, affordable health insurance. If you have no employees, ACA does not apply to you. 
Generally, an employer with fewer than 50 full-time employees or equivalents will be considered a small employer and is not 
required to provide health insurance coverage for employees. Employers with 50 or more full-time employees or equivalents 
will be considered a large employer and have responsibilities related to how and what health insurance they offer to their 
full-time employees.
More details on the Affordable Care Act as it applies to small or large businesses, and as it may change over time, can be 
found at irs.gov/affordable-care-act/employers. For enrollment information as well as how the Affordable Care Act may 
affect your business, visit HealthCare.gov.
Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act  
The Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) makes it illegal to discriminate against 
employees who volunteer for or are called to military duty. When reservists return from active duty tours of less than five years, 
they must be reemployed to their old jobs or equal jobs. To discover more about USERRA, visit: 
dol.gov/vets/programs/userra/userra_fs.htm  
For more information about employment laws and discrimination, you can contact the Michigan Department of Civil Rights 
online by visiting michigan.gov/mdcr or by calling 517-335-3165. For EEOC information, visit eeoc.gov or call 800-669-4000 . 
Health and Safety Standards 
Employers are required to comply with federal and state health and safety standards and laws through the Michigan 
Occupational Safety and Health Act (MIOSHA). For a complete set of safety and health standards by industry, contact 
MIOSHA at 517-284-7777 or online at: 
Tracking Workplace Injuries and Illnesses
An often-overlooked key component of MIOSHA standards is the requirement for employers to record and report workplace 
injuries and illnesses. Failure to do so can result in citations and penalties. Each employer is required to keep records of:
  Work-related fatalities (must be reported within eight hours to the current fatality line: 800-858-0397 )
  Injuries and illnesses that meet one or more of the general recording criteria including days away from work
  Restricted work
  Transfer to another position
  Medical treatment
  Loss of consciousness
  Significant injury or illness diagnosed by a health care professional
  Work-related amputation, loss of an eye or in-patient hospitalization of any employee (must be reported within 24 hours of 
    the incident).
CHAPTER 6   —  HIRING YOUR FIRST EMPLOYEE
michigan.gov/miosha
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       97
MIOSHA provides forms for recording and reporting as well as an online system. For more information, visit :
michigan.gov/lara/0,4601,7-154-11407_30929---,00.html or call MIOSHA at 517-284-7777.
Workers’ Compensation 
All states require employers to carry insurance coverage for employees’ work-related illnesses and injuries. Benefits are 
usually paid through an insurance company on behalf of an employer, though some larger businesses may be approved for 
self-insurance. 
 
Approximately 500 different rating classifications for workers compensation insurance exist based on the type of business an 
employer operates. Premium rates for a given classification vary widely among insurers. Insurers also have different merit and 
experience rating plans, schedule-rating plans and premium discount tables, which can affect an employer’s final premium 
cost, so shop carefully. 
 
Additional information and assistance are available at the Workers’ Compensation Agency of the Michigan Department of 
Licensing and Regulatory Affairs. Call 888-396-5041  or visit: 
Required Workplace Posters for Michigan
The following is a list of Michigan required workplace posters and where they can be obtained.
Annual Summary of Injuries and Illnesses, Form 300
michigan.gov/lara/0,4601,7-154-89334_11407_30453-174563--,00.html
Michigan Employment Security Act Notice to All Employees
michigan.gov/documents/uia/1710_Notice_to_All_Employees_Poster_3-16_516388_7.pdf
Michigan Law Prohibits Discrimination
michigan.gov/documents/mdcr/Discrimination_poster_2017_2_554046_7.pdf
Michigan Safety and Health Protection on the Job
michigan.gov/lara/0,4601,7-154-89334_11407_30453-174563--,00.html
Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS)
michigan.gov/lara/0,4601,7-154-89334_11407_30453-174563--,00.html
Michigan Wage and Hour Posters Required by Law
michigan.gov/lara/0,4601,7-154-59886_27909-152535--,00.html
Michigan Whistleblowers Protection Act
michigan.gov/lara/0,4601,7-154-89334_11407_30453-174563--,00.html
CHAPTER 6   —  HIRING YOUR FIRST EMPLOYEE
michigan.gov/wca
98       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
CHAPTER 6   —  HIRING YOUR FIRST EMPLOYEE
Required Federal Workplace Posters
The following is a list of workplace posters required by the federal government and where they can be obtained.
Job Safety and Health: It’s the Law!
osha.gov/Publications/osha3165-8514.pdf
Equal Employment Opportunity Is the Law
eeoc.gov/employers/eeo-law-poster
Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) Minimum Wage Poster
dol.gov/whd/flsa/ (you may need to scroll down the page to find links to the posters)
Employee Rights for Workers With Disabilities Paid at Subminimum Wages
dol.gov/whd/regs/compliance/posters/disabc.pdf
Employee Rights Under the Family and Medical Leave Act
dol.gov/whd/regs/compliance/posters/fmlaen.pdf  
Employee Rights Under the National Labor Relations Act
nlrb.gov/news-publications/publications/employee-rights-poster
Your Rights Under USERRA: The Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act
dol.gov/sites/dolgov/files/VETS/legacy/files/USERRA_Private.pdf
Employee Rights: Employee Polygraph Protection Act
dol.gov/whd/regs/compliance/posters/eppac.pdf
Other Required Posters for Your Business
Other posters may be required for specific types of businesses or employment circumstances. For more 
information, visit the United States Department of Labor website: dol.gov/general/topics/posters.
 
    sbdcmichigan.org       |       99
100       |       Michigan Small Business Development Center
Funded in part through a cooperative agreement with the 
U.S. Small Business Administration. All opinions, conclu -
sions or recommendations expressed are those of the au -
thor(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the SBA.
michiganSBDC.org
